THERE'S a wisp of magic in the air.Men in double-breasted, $1,000 Italian suits chatter on portable phones in the back seats of limousines snaking through city streets; new buildings shoot upward on nearly every block; new businesses are created every day. This is Shanghai in the 1990's.With money swirling around faster than anyone can count, it seems that even an ordinary investor ought to be able to get a piece of this action. So why not give the Shanghai stock market a shot?The logic is irresistible: China's economy is steaming ahead like a locomotive. In a nation famous for entrepreneurs, thousands of companies are clamoring to sell stock, and the lucky ones already approved to do so are making products like washing machines and refrigerators, wanted in every Chinese household. Such businesses seem sure to grow for years to come.Besides, the stock market in Shanghai, barely five years old, created innumerable millionaires during a boom in 1992 and 1993.  It drifted downward throughout 1994 and is now near an all-time low.AdvertisementHow could it not go up?With the curiosity of a new resident in a city reeking of opportunity and with a lurking desire to make a killing, one novice investor set out to learn how to buy some stocks. There are only 34 listed stocks available to the foreign buyer, so how hard could it be to pick a few that will grow long term, riding China's economic trajectory?The first stop was at China Cathay Securities, known as Guotai in Chinese, where, as at many of the 250 other young securities firms operating in Shanghai, masses of investors jam the ground floor each day to watch share prices on a big board and jostle each other to make a trade. Privileged visitors are ushered upstairs to the private rooms, passing by trading desks at which brokers finish one phone call after another with the salutation, "Hope you get rich!""Call me Frank," said Frank Li, an earnest, short-haired broker who speaks in a mixture of clipped, textbook English and slangy Mandarin Chinese. With two years experience in the market, Frank is considered a seasoned pro."The market will definitely go up," Frank said. Then, for good measure, he added, "The question is when and by how much."Sign me up -- the sensible reaction of any eager investor in such an atmosphere of unbridled money-making.Here's where the complications begin. How much will you invest? Frank asked. A number was suggested: $1,000. He frowned. "Our normal minimum is $10,000." Ten thousand! That's worth a moment's reflection. Frank sensed the hesitation. "Since you're a friend, $5,000 would be O.K."In the printed regulations for opening an account at Cathay, however, there is no mention of any minimum investment."We wouldn't dare print that in the regulations," said Wang Hongwei, Frank's colleague, So what is the rule about minimum investment? "There is none," he said.AdvertisementNot the most reassuring answer. But hey, no risk, no reward. Let's get down to the business of picking some stocks."I think you should quickly accumulate stocks that are undervalued," said Frank, slipping into market jargon. "Then you're sure to make a profit."Narcissus Electric is Frank's first choice. As a maker of washing machines, Narcissus is making a product that nearly everyone wants. Solid management, Frank said, and at 25 cents a share, a good price.What did Narcissus trade at the previous day? Frank shuffled through his papers and frowned again. It didn't actually trade that day, he said. Not that it was suspended or anything, there just isn't that much demand for Narcissus. About one-third to one-half of the dollar-denominated stocks in Shanghai do not trade on any given day, what you might call low liquidity.Let's look at another stock, Frank said brightly. Lujiazui (loo-jah-SWAY): a developer in the East Shanghai area that is being built as the city's new financial district over the next five years, selling land-use rights in a real estate market that is riding high. A sure thing, said Frank.An alarm bell might go off in the mind of even an inexperienced investor when he hears the words "sure thing." And one obvious question about this stock is, what happens when the land is all sold? Frank insists that it will take several years, and that his only concern is that the stock is expensive. At 73 cents a share, it is near its 52-week high of 74 cents.For a second opinion, a visit to a second securities firm.Patrick Chen brings potential investors into the modern office he shares with four others at Shanghai International Securities. Shanghai International was the most dynamic of Shanghai's securities firms until it was hit by scandal in February; it suffered huge losses in the bond futures market and was accused of trying to manipulate sales to avoid going out of business in a single day.On the computer at Mr. Chen's desk, the beginning of a company text was visible: "A Brief Introduction to the Incident -- (1) Shanghai International Securities did not lose nearly as much money as has been reported in the foreign and other media. (2) Business is proceeding as normal ---- "AdvertisementNot the most auspicious introduction. But Mr. Chen was quite open about the market's drawbacks. "People know there is insider trading," he said. "People known there is manipulation. These incidents happen every day."A few Western analysts who follow the Shanghai market confirmed this impression. Stocks rise and fall on rumors, they said, not on earnings reports. Companies that promise to invest new capital in their operations sometimes use the money to speculate in real estate instead. The rules, where they exist, are openly flouted.An American lawyer recently asked a trader to explain the difference between a lottery and the Shanghai stock market, and was told, "In the stock market, sometimes you can get information about the number before it gets picked."But then, the optimist must insist, what emerging market isn't prone to some funny business? Even if the big players dominate the market, that doesn't mean the individual can't ride the wave upward.Some of the market's complications, while seemingly negative, have a silver lining. Look at one basic condition of the Shanghai market, Mr. Chen suggested: it is divided in two. Most shares are denominated in the local currency, renminbi (RMB); a smaller number are available in United States dollar amounts. According to the rules, Chinese citizens can only buy RMB, or A shares; non-Chinese can only buy dollar, or B shares.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There is no intrinsic reason that the market should be divided; it was set up this way in 1990 to accommodate local and foreign investors who have limited access to each other's currencies. It is only a matter of time before the authorities in Beijing decide they can be unified, Mr. Chen said, and when they are, prices of the dollar shares are sure to rise because they are now trading at well below that of their renminbi counterparts.The Shanghai dollar stock index bottomed out at 51 in July 1993, and then it shot up to 104 by December 1993 and has drifted downward since. It closed last week at 54.82, up slightly from its 1995 low of 51.77 on Feb. 6.The renminbi market has had an even wilder ride. After losing nearly half its value -- from around 600 points to just over 300 -- in two months last summer, it then rocketed to 1,000 in one more month, easing since then to its close last week at 660.So when will the markets be merged? Probably not this year, said Mr. Chen. Maybe before the end of the year, said Frank.AdvertisementBut back to stock-picking. Mr. Chen likes the Post and Telecom Equipment Company, a provider for the fast-expanding telecommunications business, and Yaohua (pronounced YOW-hwah) Pilkington Glass, a Chinese-British venture that makes glass for skyscrapers and windshields.Although Post and Telecom can't match the quality of the equipment produced by foreign companies, Mr. Chen said, many parts needed in phone systems can be made locally. China will probably rely more and more on domestic producers like Post and Telecom, which made a good profit in 1994 and is trading at 58 cents a share.Yaohua Pilkington is another steadily profitable company, and an executive there, responding to a reporter's questions, was willing to entertain a visit. The executive, Gui Xintian (pronounced GWAY-shin-tee-yen), was happy to discuss the company inside the general manager's office, but said a look at the production lines was not feasible. "Privileged technology," he said.But Mr. Gui said Yaohua is producing glass at capacity and does not expect to lift its profits much past the $30 million it reported for 1994. Building a third production line will not be easy because there is no more available space at the factory. So much for upside potential.Another broker, who asked not to be named, had a bright idea for an investor who is also a reporter: write a positive article about a company, then when its stock rises, sell for a nice profit."And tell me before the article is published," the broker added cheerfully. He was disappointed to be told that newspapers prohibit reporters from writing about companies they hold stock in.But enough talk. Time to get down the business of buying.In another visit to China Cathay Securities to fill out forms, there are a few more surprises. There is a $24 fee just to open an account, and a $20 minimum commission on every trade. Then there are four more fees: a stamp tax, a stock exchange fee, and two others that were difficult to understand, either in Chinese or English.As for the method of payment, no checks are allowed, not even one from a Shanghai bank. They're too much trouble for us, said Frank's colleague, Mr. Wang. It will have to be a bank transfer.AdvertisementWould an individual investor in the United States be able to open an account this way? No worries, said Frank. He could contact us directly, by telephone or fax, or go through any large American brokerage house. A handful of American firms can buy shares in the Shanghai market directly.How do customers know how their portfolios are doing? Does Guotai send a statement of any kind? "I'm afraid we don't offer that kind of service," said Frank.One more thing, Frank said. Trade orders must be made in person. In person? Unless you want to do it by phone, Frank said, but there's a $10 monthly charge for that. What if you don't make any trades in a particular month? You are charged anyway.How many individual foreign customers does Guotai have? "Several," said Frank. Fewer than 10? "Several," he said again.Actually, most foreigners interested in stocks from China buy shares that have been listed in Hong Kong, where a generally better class of companies trade. The luckiest companies, Frank said, are those that have been allowed by the Chinese authorities to be listed in New York. But those stocks, like Shandong Huaneng and Huaneng Power International, haven't done particularly well. That's true, said Frank.The market capitalization of the Shanghai dollar market is $1.2 billion, a small percentage of the $30.8 billion Shanghai renminbi market, and tiny compared with the $280 billion Hong Kong stock market.As Frank showed the way out of Cathay's headquarters, a detour was taken through a "big customer room," where individual investors with sizable portfolios are allowed to sit in puffy chairs and monitor the market on computer screens.Who were all these Chinese investors watching the screens for dollar stocks? "They're our customers," said Frank. Aren't they prohibited from buying dollar shares directly? "Well, the market is very slow these days, so we're accepting orders from anyone with U.S. dollars." Is that breaking the rules? "I wouldn't put it that way," Frank said.AdvertisementFrank offered a firm handshake in parting. The outlook for stocks in Shanghai is strong, he said reassuringly. Inflation in China will probably fall in the second half of the year, the Hong Kong stock market will probably rise, and the attitude among stock exchange officials is "very go-go.""Yet doubts can dog any would-be investor. What about the health of the 90-year-old Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping? The stigma against emerging markets? The officials in Beijing who warn that the stock market is still "an experiment?""No worries," said Frank. "Hope you get rich!"We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 1995, on Page 3003001 of the National edition with the headline: An Innocent on the Shanghai Exchange. 
BURIED in the praise that the American diplomat Mickey Kantor heaped upon his trade agreement with the Japanese was a kernel of realism. "We did the best we could on this," Mr. Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, said the other day. "Given the state of the Japanese economy, we had to be realistic."What he also could have said is that, in order to avert a trade war, the United States had to accept less than it wanted in its trade agreement with Japan because the Government in Tokyo was too weak to make many concessions -- and very eager to claim victory over the United States.It is not an isolated problem.These days, in dealing with China and Russia as well as Japan, the United States is learning just how limited are its powers to persuade, cajole, strong-arm and bludgeon other countries into doing what it wants.That is not because those great powers are too strong. It is because they are too weak. In each case, Washington is dealing with a country whose government is unable or unwilling to bend very much because it is too vulnerable to domestic pressure.AdvertisementJust a few years ago, of course, the United States had the opposite problem: It was difficult to wring concessions from the Soviet Union because its leaders seemed too powerful and sure of themselves.Today, just when Japan, Russia and China are the countries with which the United States has the trickiest disputes and problems to resolve, all three are in the process of redefining themselves.Certainly they know that issues the United States cares deeply about are at play. But what does that matter when they are consumed by so much pressing business of their own?Watch Out Behind YouThe result, in all three nations, is a look-over-your-shoulder approach to diplomacy."All three are going through very large internal changes in terms of politics and economics," said Robert B. Zoellick, an Under Secretary of State in the Bush Administration. "They are all uncertain of their relationships with others and suspicious of outsiders, particularly the United States, when they believe it is trying to exert a dominant role. If their behavior veers in a dangerous direction they could threaten one another, or they could threaten third parties and they could threaten us."First there is Japan, the uncertain power. Obviously, as an ally and partner of the United States, Japan's potential danger to American interests is not nearly as great as Russia's or China's.But how can a country make grand gestures when its economy has been sagging for four years, its banking system is mired in the worst crisis since the Great Depression, and the main reason its Prime Minister remains in power is that the governing coalition cannot agree on anyone to replace him?Given the constraints, it was no surprise that President Clinton settled for a deal that only slightly expands on past auto trade accords and requires far less change in Japanese business practices than the Administration's stated objective of remaking Japan's economy.AdvertisementIn the end, the White House calculated that any extra concessions it might have gained by applying more pressure were not worth the potential risks to its most important relationship in the Pacific.A Sense of Limits"U.S. negotiators recognized that the divisions within the Japanese Government and the weakness of the Japanese economy limited the extent to which they could go to meeting all of America's objectives," said Robert Hormats, vice-chairman of Goldman Sachs. He added that Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japan's trade negotiator, "got a lot of domestic credit for saying no so long."Then there is China, the rising regional power. The Chinese feel particularly off balance now because they don't know who will succeed Deng Xiaoping, China's ailing 90-year-old leader, even as China adjusts to being the world's fastest growing economy.The uncertainty at home helps account for the deterioration in relations with the United States over the past year, a state of affairs that reached its lowest point since normalization in 1979 after President Clinton allowed President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan to make a private visit to the United States in early June. For the Chinese, that move -- a response to overwhelming Congressional pressure -- fueled their perception that the Administration is hostage to the whims of a hostile Capitol Hill and intent on depriving China of its rightful place as a great power.President Jiang Zemin was uncharacteristically candid -- perhaps unintentionally -- about his own vulnerability when he told the outgoing American Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, during a recent farewell meeting, "Any leader who let this pass would be overthrown."Finally there is Russia, the weakest of the three, struggling to overcome 70 years of one-party rule and a state-controlled economy. It's no wonder that a country that cannot even resolve a crisis in its breakaway region of Chechnya repeatedly says no to the United States -- whether it is to curb the Serbs in Bosnia or end its nuclear cooperation and arms deals with Iran."We are dealing here not with a functioning and institutionalized democracy but with an unstable combination of authoritarianism, pluralism and anarchy," Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security advisor in the Carter Administration, said recently.All this might sound like so much fatalism, as if the United States were powerless to win support for its views in a world gripped by other forces. But it hasn't helped matters that since the cold war the United States has failed at the basic carpentry, let alone the grand architecture, needed to build a new framework for its foreign policy.That simply hasn't happened, for many reasons -- among them that the United States itself is in the midst of a painful transition in which its financial future is clouded and its Government divided. And that means that the United States ends up dealing with each crisis day by day and lobbying for its point of view from a weak position, as the other side does the same.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 1995, on Page 4004003 of the National edition with the headline: The World; Why the U.S. Takes Guff From Weaklings. 
The Hong Kong palaces -- those huge, flashy, freezing restaurants that seat hundreds of people -- arrived in Chinatown long ago. But Flushing, Queens, has mostly been known for a more intimate style. The recent arrival of K. B. Garden Restaurant changed all that.The size of a couple of football fields, the pristine new restaurant is filled at lunchtime with women wheeling dim sum carts through the vast space and calling out the names of their wares. There is just about anything you can imagine, from the usual har gow and shiu mai dumplings to braised duck feet, spicy tripe and green-lipped mussels topped with mayonnaise. Some women have deep carts filled with jook, the bland rice porridge that is breakfast in South China. Others have soft, sweet bean curd served in bowls.And should you want to order something from the menu, it is not only encyclopedic but also in English, a boon in a place where English is definitely a foreign language.At night you find people eating seafood fished from the tank, crisp-skinned pork, giant platters of noodles, sizzling platters of beef. There are usually a few tables of big-spenders, too, conspicuously consuming fancy dishes like shark's fin soup. You may not want to do that, but their presence is a good indication that right now this is the place to be in Flushing.K. B. Garden Restaurant, 136-28 39th Avenue, Flushing, Queens, (718) 961-9088. Extravagantly wide range of prices. RUTH REICHLWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 6, 1995, on Page C00024 of the National edition with the headline: Diner's Journal. 
FOLLOWING a hunch that took him trekking through Tibet, a scientist with the  Wildlife Conservation Society has found a herd of Tibet red deer, a species not  seen in the wild by a Western scientist for about 50 years.The animal, a relative of the North American elk, was last reported in a Western publication in the 1940's, and the deer was subsequently listed as "probably extinct" by the World Conservation Union, said the scientist, Dr. George B. Schaller, the director for science at the conservation group. The Wildlife Conservation Society carries out wildlife research and operates the Bronx Zoo.Dr. Schaller made the rediscovery with Liu Wulin, an official of the Tibet Forest Bureau, and Dr. Wang Xiaoming of the East China Normal University in Shanghai.The search began because several red-deer stags were seen in 1987 in a menagerie in Lhasa, the capital of Tibet. "The very fact that there were some captive animals indicated that some remained in the wild," Dr. Schaller said. "From past records, I knew the approximate range of the Tibet red deer, or shou  as it's sometimes called, so we made a special effort to look at those areas to  see if any deer survived."AdvertisementThe researchers found "scattered remnants" of the deer in their traditional range in the southeastern Himalayas along the border with India, but in numbers  so limited that long-term survival in those areas is in question. "Then, by accident, we found a nice little population of maybe 200 animals in an area we didn't expect them," Dr. Schaller said. The herd was about 100 miles east of Lhasa in an area about 100 miles north-northwest of the animal's past known range.Dr. Schaller said the Tibet Forest Bureau was "now very concerned about wildlife" and had established a guard patrol to protect the remaining animals from poachers.The Tibet red deer, or Cervus elaphus wallichi, is actually gray-brown in color. Mature animals weigh about 250 pounds and stand about four feet at the shoulder. Males have a distinctive white rump patch, and adult males typically have five-tined antlers that bend inward at an angle distinct from that of other species of red deer, Dr. Schaller said. The animals inhabit alpine meadows 13,000 to 14,000 feet above sea level.Already geographically isolated, most of Tibet was until recently off limits  to Westerners since the Chinese Communist invasion in 1950. Since then, the Tibet red deer and other horned animals have been coveted for their velvety antlers, which are prized in Asian medicine as a treatment for fever and rheumatism, and as an aphrodisiac.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a result, Dr. Schaller said, the already limited numbers of red deer were  hunted throughout the 1960's and 70's until they all but disappeared, according to accounts given by local people.The news of the Tibet red deer is part of a continuing series of recent discoveries. Since 1992, two new species of land mammals have been captured in the 150,000-acre Vu Quang Nature Reserve in northwestern Vietnam near Laos. The  Vu Quang ox, a deer-like animal with long, straight horns, was discovered in 1992, and a giant 100-pound muntjac, or barking deer, was found in 1994. They are among only a handful of new large land mammals discovered worldwide this century.Evidence has also been found in Vietnam of two new species of bird, a new fish and a tortoise with a striking yellow shell. And in Tibet, a scientific party reported this year that it had found a breed of horse dating to the Stone  Age.Sometimes, animals known to have existed, but thought to have become extinct, are rediscovered in out-of-the-way places.For example, the Vietnamese warty pig, which was last reported seen by Westerners about 100 years ago, was seen in the wild this year. In Pakistan last year, two Westerners in an isolated area encountered a woolly flying squirrel, an animal thought to have been extinct.Biologists believe that many other species remain to be discovered -- or rediscovered -- in isolated places around the globe, but they fear that many of  them may be verging on extinction because of human encroachment on their habitat.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 1995, on Page C00004 of the National edition with the headline: Hunch Leads to Discovery of Herd Of Tibet Deer Thought to Be Extinct. 
I have always harbored a mild interest in dianthus. These plants are not difficult to grow, they have a long and colorful history, they're totally in character with my cottage garden and the blossoms are delightfully fragrant. So I amassed a modest collection of heirloom varieties with names like Inchmery and Queen of Sheba, while keeping an eye peeled for rarities like Bat's Double Red. But pinks held merely a passing attraction until Rand B. Lee came into my life.In horticulture there are a handful of ardent souls who exist solely to glorify a certain species. Salvias, hostas, pelargoniums and clematis all have their champions. Mr. Lee is unabashedly dotty about dianthus.If pressed, Mr. Lee will talk about matters religious, political or meteorological. He'll chat about his father, Manfred Lee, an author of the Ellery Queen mysteries, and he'll tell you riveting tales about growing up in Roxbury, Conn. But the conversation always comes back to dianthus.I met Mr. Lee when a copy of The Gilliflower Times (edited by Mr. Lee) appeared in my mailbox with a flier that warned, "This brochure may be hazardous to your petunias." I figured that someone vigorously opposed to petunias was my sort of guy, so I joined the American Dianthus Society without further hesitation. That was in 1992, and Mr. Lee later admitted that an earlier media blitz was not entirely successful.Advertisement"I got an immediate and overwhelming response of seven members," he said. Undaunted, he proceeded to publicize dianthus until he had persuaded 100 kindred spirits (myself among them) to sign up.For the society's motto, Mr. Lee selected "Dianthus in Horto Omni," which loosely translates into "A Pink in Every Plot," or so he assures me. Faithful to its slogan, this organization actively seeks converts. The letter he sends to prospective members describes the society as "a group of gardeners obsessed with cottage pinks, hardy border carnations, sweet williams, sweet wivelsfields and other members of the varied dianthus clan." It continues, "It's a family with annual, biennial and perennial members tolerant of drought and alkalinity, some great creepers, alpines or edging plants, many sporting decorative blue-green or gray-green foliage."Since then, Mr. Lee has sent me packets of seeds accompanied by letters filled with dianthus descriptions, which are virtually irresistible. He's willing to talk well into the night about cottages, carnations and cultivars that went extinct. He's spilling with trivia connected with carnations. Did you know that the carnation is the state flower of Ohio? Were you aware that Chaucer was the first to refer to sops-in-wine?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. Lee really waxes poetic when it comes to cultivation advice. After all, he's trying to keep the legend alive. He'll come to the rescue whatever your problem happens to be, if it pertains to pinks, that is. Do you have soggy soil? Try raised beds. Are you pestered by red spider mites? Spray the foliage with icy cold water. Do thrips ruin your flowers? Apply Sunspray the moment buds form, and apply it regularly while your pinks are in flower.Although Mr. Lee and I are linked by our love for pinks or gilliflowers or sops-in-wine or whatever you care to call them, there's one major difference between us. I grow my dianthus in a New England cottage garden, where they nestle amid peonies, violas, artemisia and other companion plants. Mr. Lee tackles his pinks in Sante Fe, N.M., where he shades them to prolong the blossoming period, provides water when it fails to rain and amends his clay soil.He insists that his task is easier.  "First and foremost, dianthus need good drainage," he said. "Take a look at the foliage and you can tell that these are drought-tolerant plants. Nothing kills a pink faster than soggy soil. In New England, you want to dig down a foot, take out the soil, loosen the earth at the bottom of the trench, mix in some bone meal and backfill, with half the volume of soil mixed with coarse sand or gravel. At the same time, you might add some lime to make the soil alkaline."He also labors to demystify the nomenclature connected with dianthus. Most of the dianthus on the market can be classified as cottage pinks (Dianthus plumarius), carnations (Dianthus caryophyllus), China pinks (Dianthus chinensis) or sweet williams (Dianthus barbatus).For his part, Mr. Lee favors cottage pinks, especially the highly fragrant sorts. It's an affection we share. Recently, I made the mistake of asking Mr. Lee to suggest a few favorites. The annotated list went on for several pages, headed by Rose de Mai ("because the blossoms last so long") followed by Rainbow Loveliness, Dianthus superbus, Dianthus arenarius, Dianthus gratianopolitanus, Mrs. Sinkins, Grenadin and so on. When requested to mention a few dianthus that he did not endorse, the list was considerably shorter.Information about membership in the American Dianthus Society, is available from Rand B. Lee, P.O. Box 22232, Sante Fe 87502.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 1995, on Page 1001042 of the National edition with the headline: CUTTINGS; Seeking Converts for Dianthus. 
To the Editor:The role of the New York Times columnist James B. Reston in introducing acupuncture to this country must not be underestimated (obituary, Dec. 7).When Mr. Reston traveled to China as part of the advance team before President Nixon's 1971 visit, he suffered an acute attack of appendicitis and was hospitalized in China. His appendix was removed in an emergency procedure.He suffered postsurgical pain severe enough to cause him great distress. This pain was treated with acupuncture while Mr. Reston was in the hospital.Mr. Reston's reports of his experiences with Chinese medicine, and the reports he sent along with his observations of the effectiveness of acupuncture, helped open the doors in this country to an exploration of alternative medicine, a trend that has matured.WILLIAM L. PRENSKY President, National Academy of Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine New York, Dec. 9, 1995We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this letter appears in print on December 14, 1995, on Page A00030 of the National edition with the headline: Reston Helped Open a Door to Acupuncture.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

Medeva P.L.C., a British drug maker, signed an agreement with a unit of Johnson & Johnson Inc. to develop and sell its hepatitis B vaccine in the Asia-Pacific region, excluding Japan. Medeva said it would work in conjunction with Johnson & Johnson's Janssen Pharmaceutica International unit, the largest international drug company in Korea and China. Janssen will perform clinical trials, submit regulatory applications and market Medeva's hepatitis treatment locally. Analysts said the drug, called hepagene, could be a big sales generator for the British drug maker if clinical trials proved it was effective as a treatment for existing carriers of hepatitis B in addition to being a vaccine to prevent contracting the disease.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 1995, on Page 1001041 of the National edition with the headline: COMPANY NEWS;MEDEVA TO DEVELOP VACCINE WITH JOHNSON & JOHNSON UNIT. 
International   A3-13QUEEN URGES A ROYAL DIVORCE Queen Elizabeth II has urged Prince Charles and Princess Diana to agree to a divorce soon, Buckingham Palace said. A spokesman said the Prince had agreed, but his wife's response was not known. A1YELTSIN VOWS TO HOLD COURSE With his aides still reeling from their defeat by the Communists, President Boris N. Yeltsin spoke up for the first time since Sunday's parliamentary elections to assure Russians that his Government would not change policy. A3HONDURAS FACES ITS BRUTAL PAST During its decade-long "dirty war" against suspected rebel sympathizers, the Honduran military killed dozens of people. Now, for the first time, a civilian court has charged 14 military officers with human rights violations. A10NATO TAKES COMMAND IN BOSNIA A U.S. officer took command of military operations in Bosnia and declared that the NATO forces under him had come not "as a bunch of cowboys looking for a fight" but "on a peaceful mission." A9AdvertisementARAB 'MARTYRS' LOSE MYSTIQUE The withdrawal of the Israelis and the arrival of a Palestinian police force last week have made the militant culture of Palestinians on the West Bank irrelevant. A12South Korea's former leader was hospitalized during a fast. A4China said it would expel a German reporter critical of Beijing. A5Algeria gained a vote of confidence with foreign oil contracts. A12Shazikou Journal: Wine is an Englishman's legacy to China. A4National   A14-26, B13-18BUDGET TALKS STALL AGAIN House Republicans blocked an agreement that Speaker Newt Gingrich had made with  President Clinton on the budget and negotiations became snagged once again. A1News Analysis: The 73 freshmen vs. Speaker Gingrich. A1SENATE MOVES ON WHITEWATER The Senate voted to ask a Federal judge to order President Clinton to comply with subpoenas and turn over Whitewater material that the White House has said is protected by the lawyer-client privilege and executive privilege. A1HOUSE OVERRIDES VETO House voted for the first time to override a veto by President Clinton, reacting swiftly to his 11th-hour rejection of legislation to make it more difficult for stockholders to bring fraud suits. A1COMMUNICATIONS ACCORD House and Senate negotiators agreed on a sweeping bill to rewrite the nation's communications laws from top to bottom, clearing the way for Congress to pass a  final bill before the weekend. A1DOCTORS CRITICIZED H.M.O.'S Doctors across the country said that health maintenance organizations have routinely interfered with their duty to tell patients about the benefits, risks  and costs of various treatments. A1Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ARMY AND WHITE SUPREMACISTS Many officers and enlisted troops said in interviews that they agree with the Pentagon's position that few soldiers participate in white supremacist hate groups. A14AdvertisementAIRLINE TICKET TAX EXPIRING The F.A.A. said that a 10 percent airline ticket tax probably will not be renewed before it expires on Dec. 31. That will cost the Treasury about $15 million a day but provide a windfall for air travelers or the airlines. A20SLAVERY EXHIBIT CANCELED The Library of Congress bowed to pressure from staff members and closed an exhibit about slavery and plantation life. A21DINOSAUR FOSSILS FOUND Fossil hunters digging in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia have found the remains of  a dinosaur that died 80 million years ago while sitting on its nest of eggs. A22LAWSUIT ON MIRANDA RIGHTS Lawyers for the American Civil Liberties Union and other civil rights groups filed a lawsuit accusing the Los Angeles and Santa Monica police departments of  routinely and intentionally violating suspects' Miranda rights A23Metro Digest   B3MISHAP AT KENNEDY Thousands of travelers hoping to spend the holidays in the tropics or amid the warmth of home and family were thwarted yesterday as snow and wind lashed the New York metropolitan region again and an accident involving a 747 jetliner shut down Kennedy International Airport for several hours. A1Business Digest   D1Arts/Entertainment   C9-18Theater: "Paul Robeson." C9 Film: "Shanghai Triad." C12 Music: The Pop Life. C9 Dance: Ailey troupe. C14 Books: A family's impact on German history. C16 Television: The networks' seasons so far. C9 Forecasting the weather. C18 "Firing Line." C18The Home Section   C1-7Sports   B20-27Baseball: Orioles step up attempt to woo Cone from Yankees. B21 Basketball: Heat beats Nets in overtime. B21 Columns: Araton on Pat Riley B21 Football: Rutgers hires a former assistant to Bill Walsh. B21 The Chargers may be back in playoffs. B21 Skiing: Free lift passes in exchange for eating a lot. B25Obituaries   B19Mario A. Procaccino, challenged New York City's mayor in 1969.Editorials/Op-Ed   A28-29EditorialsMake a budget deal now. Stuffing the P.B.A.'s stocking. Philip Taubman: Communism.LettersWilliam Safire: "Rick will say . . ." Maureen Dowd: Nix 'Nixon' -- tricky pix. Warren B. Rudman: Take this job. Please. Stephen Gillers: Clinton has a right to privacy.AdvertisementNeediest Cases   B2Chronicle   A30Bridge   C15Crossword   C16We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 1995, on Page A00002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
For the World Wide Web, Move Up to a Mass Medium Three years ago, the World Wide Web was little more than a research tool for physicists and computer hobbyists. Today, corporations are rushing to stake out  its prime real estate, even reserving addresses like flu.com and toiletpaper.com. But a more serious measure of the Web's emergence as possibly the next mass medium was the announcement that The Associated Press would use it to distribute articles and photographs on the Internet. The plan represents a significant move onto the Web by an old-line news organization. [Page A1.] For print, film, radio and television, the transition from mere technological marvel to mass medium came in a few defining moments -- from the appearance of the Gutenberg Bible to the first coast-to-coast network broadcast. [D5.]Deal Reached to End Shutdown  The White House and the Republican-controlled Congress agreed on a temporary spending measure to reopen Government operations after shutdown since Tuesday. President Clinton accepted the Republicans' goal of balancing the Federal budget in seven years but insisted on language that would help protect his priorities in negotiations. [A1.]Serious About Comedy  20th Century Fox Television, trying to improve its poor record in comedy programming, has paid an estimated $60 million in the last month to sign established writers and producers to develop new half-hour comedy shows. [D7.]Studios' Accounting Brings a Suit  The heirs of Jim Garrison, the onetime New Orleans district attorney, whose book was the basis for the movie "J.F.K.," have sued Hollywood studios, arguing that  their accounting methods amount to collusion and price-fixing. [D2.] China Plans to Cut Tariffs China said it would cut import duties next year on more than 4,000 items by an average of at least 30 percent. The promise, one of China's most substantial on  liberalized trade, was the major focus of a day in which leaders of 18 Asian and Pacific nations endorsed a blueprint to pursue free trade. [A11.]AdvertisementMurdoch Move Rattles British  The decision by News International to cease publication of Today, a British tabloid, again showed that when Rupert Murdoch moves, Britain's newspaper industry shakes. [D7.]A Billionaire's Book, Tirelessly Promoted  The face of Bill Gates regularly adorns the covers of publications around the world. Still, Viking, the publisher of his new book, "The Road Ahead," and Microsoft, the company he runs, are starting a marketing blitz for the book. Viking plans to spend $1 million. Mary B. W. Tabor: Publishing. [D7.]Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seeking Bilingual Readers  There are numerous Spanish-language publications, but until recently there were  few magazines written in English specifically for Hispanic readers. That is changing, with several new publications aimed at an upwardly mobile market. Advertising. [D9.]The Cyberchallenge for Magazines  A computer work area may not rank with a Barcalounger by the fireplace as a favorite place to read long, thoughtful articles. This is only one of the problems the magazine industry faces as it tries to display its offerings on line. Denise Caruso: Digital Commerce. [D6.]Picket Signs on the Runway?  Donna Eller, a successful model for 10 years, is struggling to build a labor union that Samuel Gompers probably would never have dreamed of: one for fashion  models. [B1.]Tentative Deal at Boeing  The Boeing Company and leaders of the machinists' union reached a tentative agreement to end a strike that has lasted more than six weeks. [B10.]We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: BUSINESS DIGEST. 
To the Editor:Re "Shell Game in Nigeria" (editorial, Dec. 3):Nigeria, as well as most of Africa, has been ruled by soldiers, which means  that these countries have not been able to build a stable political system or lasting governments. It is ironic that most of these nations were colonized by the democratically minded Europeans.It is the world's political and institutional leaders' responsibility to end  this situation, not Royal Dutch/Shell Group, as you imply.The role of a corporation is to increase shareholder value, add value to equities and be aware of the changing needs of the consumer. It is not the role  of corporations to be involved in the internal affairs of sovereign states, no matter how awful the situation is.Corporations, through specific programs in education, health, job creation, legal contributions to political parties and investment to improve infrastructure, add value to countries where they conduct their business.AdvertisementHowever, direct political involvement is dangerous and not the function of a  publicly held company.We know that Cuba's and China's human rights records are even worse than Nigeria's. Should Coca-Cola's Roberto C. Goizueta, a Cuban-American, be involved?Should Charles B. Wang of Computer Associates, a Chinese-American, use his influence as an investor in China to intervene in that country's internal affairs?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a shareholder in both companies, I would frown upon any direct involvement. The same goes for Shell's chairman, Cor Herkstroter.What I would expect from these managers is to influence the United States and British Governments to apply pressure for badly needed changes. They have the right to because of corporate taxes paid on the profits obtained overseas.I would expect Mr. Goizueta to lobby in the United States Senate to end the Cuban embargo so that we can sell Coke in Cuba and increase our returns; Mr. Wang to work through our State Department to end slave work and organ trafficking in the Chinese prison system, and Mr. Herkstroter to pressure the foreign office through Shell's British arm to pressure Nigeria.Shell, whose operation in Nigeria represents more than half the Government's  income and 90 percent of the country's exports, is the easy culprit but the wrong target. The outside world should impose an oil embargo and help foster an  opposition pledged to democracy and change.JORGE BERTRAN Buenos Aires, Dec. 4, 1995We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this letter appears in print on December 9, 1995, on Page 1001022 of the National edition with the headline: Oil Company Can't End the Tyranny in Nigeria.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

Edible NestsQ.  What kind of bird makes the nests for bird's nest soup?A.  The edible nest swiftlet, Collacali fuciphaga, of Southeast Asia, takes  its name from the nests used in the soup. These birds make small nests almost entirely of strands of hardened saliva, according to "Ornithology," by Frank B.  Gill (W.H. Freeman & Company). The nests are affixed to nearly inaccessible spots on cave walls and ceilings.The Chinese consider soup made from the nests to be a great delicacy and they are harvested by the thousand, often, unfortunately, before the two or three eggs have hatched and the nestlings have matured. The few feathers or droppings  are carefully cleaned from the nests and the strands are rinsed and soaked until what remains resembles, by one account, small sponges rather than nests. The soup, which often has bits of chicken or other meat in addition to the translucent strands of nest, has a gelatinous consistency. The strands can also  be dried for year-round use.The swiftlets are shades of dove gray and grow about five inches long. They live on coasts and islands and feed over forest and scrub. They range from the Anaman and Nicobar Islands through Southeast Asia to the Philippines, often forming colonies of thousands of nests.Edible nest swiftlets navigate deep inside dark caves to build their nests by using the same echolocation techniques that bats use, bouncing high-frequency sounds off the cave walls, according to The Macmillan Illustrated Animal Encyclopedia.AdvertisementPollution and overharvesting have cut the population and made the nests an expensive delicacy. In Hong Kong, the price passed $1,000 a pound for top-quality nests in the late 1980's. A related bird makes "black" nests, containing feathers and other wastes, that are difficult to clean. These are sold to less exacting or more impecunious gourmets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Most of the nests harvested today are taken from Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Vietnam and China. In Sarawak, the nests from limestone caves in Niah  in the northern part of the country are harvested only under license from the Sarawak Museum, which is charged with preserving both the birds and the prehistoric cave paintings that decorate their homes.The nesting season there runs from March until May; by August, the nests are  considered to be free of eggs and hatchlings and fair game for harvesters. By the light of candles, they stand on spindly bamboo platforms in the caves and use knives on the ends of bamboo poles to dislodge the nests.Short-tailed and long-winged, all swift species have highly developed flying  abilities and eat, drink and even copulate while flying. They have tiny legs, seldom walk and cannot perch, but cling to vertical surfaces. Other swifts also  use salivary fluids from special glands to glue nests together and attach them to walls.   C. CLAIBORNE RAYWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 1995, on Page C00006 of the National edition with the headline: Q&A.; 
The United Nations recently celebrated the 50th anniversary of its founding.  How much do you know about the work and the workings of this venerable institute?1. The United Nations has six major divisions with specific areas of responsibility. Give the name of the body that:a. Represents all nations.b. Maintains international peace and security.c. Adjudicates legal disputes. 2. The Security Council consists of 15 member nations: five permanent and 10 rotatating. Name the permanent members. 3. The nations providing most of the troops for current United Nations missions  are Bangladesh, France, Pakistan, Britain and the United States. Which nation provides the largest contingent? Which provides the smallest? 4. Six of the people listed below held the position of United States representative to the United Nations. Identify them.a. George Bush.b. Adlai E. Stevensonc. J. William Fulbrightd. Andrew Younge. Robert A. Taftf. Daniel P. Moynihang. Barry M. Goldwaterh. Henry Cabot Lodgei. Clare Booth Lucej. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick 5. Although the United Nations is headquartered in New York, its charter was signed in another American city. Which one? 6. Of the agencies related to the United Nations by special agreement, many are  known by their acronymns. What do these well-known initials stand for?: UNESCO,  IMF, WHO. 7. The following phrases describe three controversial speakers who have appeared before the General Assembly. Who are they?Advertisementa. A nationless Middle Eastern Leader.b. The head of a Communist Government who created a stir by staying inHarlem.c. The head of a Communist Government who banged his shoe on the desk. 8. What United States President first used the phrase "united nations?" 9. Put these Secretaries General in chronological order:a. Javier Perez de Cuellar (Peru)b. Dag Hammarskjold (Sweden)c. Trygve Lie (Norway)d. Boutros Boutros-Ghali (Egypt)e. Kurt Waldheim (Austria)f. U Thant (Burma) 10. Which of these Secretaries Generala. Died in a plane crash while on a mission to the Congo?b. Was later disclosed to have assisted in Nazi persecutions duringWorld War II? 11. The U.N. is a successor to an organization created after World War I to keep world peace. What was its name? 12. How many members does the United Nations have?a. 159b. 185c. 201 13. The first series of cease-fire agreements negotiated by the United Nations was signed in 1949. In what region of the world did it go into effect? (Or, which nations signed it?) Which American delegte won the Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the pact? 14. In 1950, under the aegis of the United Nations, a President sent American troops into a trouble spot. Which President? Where did he send the troops?1. a. General Assembly; b. Security Council; c. International Court of Justice.2. China, France, Russia, United States, Britain.3. Largest group, France; smallest group, United States.4. a., b., d., f., h., j.5. San Francisco.6. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; International Monetary Fund; World Health Organization.7. a.) Yasir Arafat, Palestine Liberation Organization; b.) Fidel Castro, Cuba; c.) Nikita S. Khrushchev, Soviet Union.Advertisement8. President Franklin D. Roosevelt.9. c., b., f., e., a., d.10. a.: Dag Hammarskjold; b.: Kurt Waldheim.11. The League of Nations.12. b. (185)13. The Middle East (Treaties were signed by Israel and Egypt, Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Jordan, Israel and Syria); Dr. Ralph Bunche.14. President Harry S. Truman; Korea.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 1995, on Page A4 of the National edition with the headline: QUIZ. 
Strong Export Sales Shrink U.S. Trade Deficit American exports rose to new heights in September and the trade deficit inched down, to $8.35 billion, the lowest level of the year, the Commerce Department said. The American deficit with Japan narrowed for the sixth consecutive month,  and even the deficit with China declined.The results indicate that the economy's growth rate during the latest quarter is likely to be revised upward significantly. [A1.] Dow Sets Yet Another Record The Dow Jones industrial average continued its remarkable surge, though broad indexes fell a bit. By increasing 18.06 points, to 5,041.61, the Dow set its 61st record this year. [D9.]Chrysler Director Resigns  Joseph E. Antonini surprised Chrysler by resigning from its board, thus increasing pressure on the company to replace him with Kirk Kerkorian's strategist, Jerome B. York. Chrysler shares jumped $1.50, to $51.25. [D4.]Masco Sale Draws $1.1 Billion  Masco sold its home furnishings business to investors assembled by Morgan Stanley Capital Partners for $1.1 billion. [D2.]AdvertisementGovernment Shutdown Was Costly  The Government shutdown cost taxpayers $700 million or more, the White House said. Meanwhile, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said he was developing plans to keep paying the nation's bills into next year. [B20.]Politics goes hand in hand with the tax laws, as seen this year in capital gains policy and tax credits for children. [A1.]$5.3 Billion Offer for Forte  Granada Group offered $5.3 billion for Forte of Britain, whose shares rose sharply on the prospect of a higher bid. [D7.]Borland's Founder Is Leaving  Philippe Kahn, the flamboyant founder of Borland, quit as chairman to work on a  start-up company, Starfish Software. [D4.]Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harrah's Jazz in Chapter 11  The fledgling gambling industry in New Orleans suffered a big setback when Harrah's Jazz filed for bankruptcy protection. [A17.]Hilton Investors Are Perplexed  Hilton Hotels left investors puzzled as to whether it really plans to split itself into separate hotel and gambling companies. Hilton's president resigned Tuesday. [D8.]Nestle to Sell Vineyards  Nestle plans to sell its California wineries, including Beringer Vineyards, to focus on its other foods and beverages. [D7.]OPEC Continues Output Ceiling  OPEC decided to continue its production ceiling through the first half of next year, even though a number of its members violate it. Some analysts said prices  could drop. [D7.]Smucker to Sell Pie Business  Smucker is selling its Mrs. Smith's frozen pie business, which it bought 18 months ago for $84 million. The company also reported a 24 percent drop in quarterly earnings. The buyer of the pie business, SBI Brands, is headed by Scott Rahn, who ran Conagra's frozen food division. [D4.]Japanese Plan for Failing Banks  Tokyo Kyodo Bank, a special bank set up in March to take over two failed Tokyo credit cooperatives, will have a vastly expanded role to deal with any other failures of financial institutions, the Finance Ministry said. [D7.]We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: BUSINESS DIGEST. 
This wasn't exactly LAX being shut down for the Presidential coif aboard Air  Force One, but some residents of the Upper West Side awoke yesterday morning to  feel the aftereffects of President Clinton's dinner on Monday night.To make the area around Cafe des Artistes safe for the First Eater, cars were towed from legal parking spaces on 67th Street near Central Park West and parked elsewhere in the neighborhood. The street was heavily secured before the  President's arrival, and residents who wanted to go home had to show identification containing their address or be escorted to their apartments by police officers. Shortly before the President arrived, a city street sweeper cleaned 67th Street.When residents found that their cars were gone yesterday morning, they were  directed to a police barricade near Central Park where they were directed to their cars.Mike Tarr, a Secret Service spokesman, said yesterday that his agency had asked the police to move "several" cars "to facilitate the arrival of the Presidential motorcade," adding that if it caused any inconvenience, "we certainly apologize."AdvertisementNeither the police nor transportation officials could say how many cars were  towed, but a resident of the block said the tow trucks were working for hours.Oh yes, the dinner. Mr. Clinton dined with nine other people, including Susan Thomases, a family friend; Bruce Lindsay, the deputy White House counsel, and Harold Ickes, the deputy White House chief of staff. Mr. Clinton had dined at the restaurant when he visited New York as Governor of Arkansas, but he had never eaten there as President, according to the restaurant's owner, George Lang.The President order grilled quail served on a bed of caramelized apples macerated in Calvados. He was seen using pumpernickel bread to sop up the juice. (Who could blame him?)But Mr. Clinton was out yesterday morning running it off in Central Park. Regular joggers there found him and his security detail running around the Reservoir and joined in. Mary Fortuna, an East Side resident, was about to begin her morning run when "all of a sudden I saw Bill Clinton running by me, and a man said, 'Come on, you want to run with the President?' "Mr. Clinton, it seems, was such a fast runner that Ms. Fortuna could not keep up with him.Hunger Striker HospitalizedOn Oct. 14, six Tibetans began a hunger strike across from the United Nations, vowing to refrain from eating until the international bodies recognized that Tibet is occupied by China and took steps to return Tibet to control by the Dalai Lama. They said that if they died, other Tibetans were ready to take their places.Late yesterday afternoon, one of the strikers was taken to Bellevue Hospital  after doctors determined that she was seriously ill and unable to decide for herself whether she needed treatment, said Heidi Melz, a program director with the Office of Tibet, which represents the Dalai Lama in the Americas. The striker was identified only as Yiga, 35, a Minneapolis woman.The protesters have been lying on futons in Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, at 47th Street and First Avenue, wearing wool caps and covered with blankets. Yesterday, other Tibetans were chanting slogans like "Free Tibet" and "China Out Of Tibet"  behind the strikers, and monks prayed over them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Melz said there had been no response to the hunger strike by United Nations officials or world leaders attending the General Assembly session.AdvertisementCastro-WatchingFor those stargazers who get their kicks by spotting big-time political leaders, President Fidel Castro of Cuba has been a hot item this week.But the Fatigued One had his own bout of celebrity fever Monday night, when he went to Jimmy's Bronx Cafe to speak to some Puerto Rican business leaders, many of whom favor lifting the economic embargo against Cuba. When Mr. Castro arrived at the banquet room, he was seated at a side table out of the view of the audience. At the next table he spotted Willie Colon, the internationally known salsa musician who lives in Westchester County."Willie!" Mr. Castro said with the fervor of a fan at a rock concert, and broke into a wide smile. The two embraced in a bear hug.Mr. Castro continued making his rounds yesterday. He was given a lunch by Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the Daily News publisher, who said he had made several trips to Cuba in the last year and had held almost 50 hours of conversations with the Cuban President. The lunch, at Mr. Zuckerman's Fifth Avenue apartment,  was attended by other media notables like Mike Wallace, Peter Jennings, William  Safire and Barbara Walters.Answering questions through a translator, Mr. Castro said that he was not afraid of facing an opponent in an election, but that such elections were not part of his country's political system. He described Cuba as "an Athenian democracy but without plebeians and without slaves."He said he considered President Jimmy Carter "a courageous" man, though he said he was not having the same experience with Mr. Clinton. But he added: "I look at Clinton with respect, and I tell you that sincerely. He seems to be a good person."He said his greatest accomplishment was "survival" in the face of "the greatest power in the world." He described Cuba's relationship with the United States in David-and-Goliath terms -- except, he said, "we do not have a slingshot."He held out little hope of improved relations. He said that given the demands being made by the United States, "we have no steps to take except to give up." He said he wondered why the United States could not have ties with Cuba when it  has relations with Vietnam and China.At one point in the lunch, Mr. Castro, who is known for his long speeches, was being questioned by John McLaughlin, the rapid-fire talk show host. "You're  a journalist," Mr. Castro scolded. "But you don't let me speak."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 1995, on Page A00012 of the National edition with the headline: THE U.N. AT 50: REPORTERS NOTEBOOK;Clinton Has Dinner And Cars Go Missing. 
DEPLETION of the earth's protective ozone layer is exposing some areas of the world, including parts of the United States, to biologically harmful doses of ultraviolet radiation, but some other areas will not become vulnerable for another 20 to 50 years, according to a new study.The reason for the variance, the authors of the study say, is that patterns of cloud cover vary from one area to another. Clouds as well as ozone block ultraviolet radiation, and the actual pattern and amount of radiation reaching the ground cannot be calculated globally unless this is taken into account.By making the calculation in that manner, experts in California have concluded on the basis of satellite data that large parts of North America, most of central Europe, the Mediterranean, New Zealand, South Africa and the southern half of Australia, Argentina and Chile are now being subjected to significant increases in harmful radiation. In the United States, the affected areas arethe  Midwest, the Southwest including southern California, and part of the Northeast. Hawaii is also being affected, according to the study.The research was done by Dr. Dan Lubin, a research physicist at the California Space Institute at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego, and Elsa H. Jensen, an aerospace engineer with the SeaSpace Corporation,  a satellite instrument and software company in San Diego. Their report appeared  in the Oct. 26 issue of the British journal Nature.AdvertisementUltraviolet-B from the sun, a form of radiation that can cause skin cancer and cataracts, damage the immune system and disrupt natural ecosystems, is normally blocked by a layer of ozone in the stratosphere. Industrial chemicals,  principally chlorofluorocarbons used as refrigerants, destroy stratospheric ozone.  Under an international agreement, the production of chlorofluorocarbons  is to cease at the end of this year. But because the chemicals persist so long in the atmosphere, ozone depletion is expected to continue for decades."Whether or not you can assert that ozone depletion is an environmental problem" at any given time "depends very much on where you are," Dr. Lubin said.He and Ms. Jensen calculated that at the estimated average global rate of ozone depletion, about 2.5 percent per decade, large parts of continental Europe, North and South America, Australia and Southern Africa would be bathed in increased UV-B radiation in five years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the British Isles and Ireland, for instance, are not expected to experience a significant increase for another 30 years, and it is not expected for 20 to 50 years in parts of central Russia, most of China, Japan, North and South Korea and the Indian subcontinent. Mexico, northern Australia, New Guinea  and areas of South America north of Sao Paulo, Brazil, are also not expected to  experience increases for decades.In the United States, the South and Pacific Northwest should not experience increases for another 20 years, according to the calculations.A major factor in determining whether biologically significant amounts reach  the earth, Dr. Lubin said, is the natural variability of cloudiness in a given area. When cloud cover varies widely from one year to the next, the ultraviolet  radiation that people and other organisms are exposed to also varies. Increases  in the radiation because of the depleted ozone layer probably do not have a biological effect until they exceed this natural variability, Dr. Lubin said.To calculate natural variability, Dr. Lubin and Ms. Jensen combined satellite data on global ozone trends from 1978 to 1993 with satellite data on solar radiation reflected from clouds from 1985 to 1990. This produced a base line of  natural variability, against which the researchers compared trends in UV expected from ozone depletion. The comparison enabled them to determine how long it takes for the expected UV trend to become significant.In determining the present amount of UV-B striking the earth, an indirect analysis of this sort would not be necessary if there were abundant UV detection instruments around the world. But the instruments are sparse, and most have not  been in position long enough, over a broad enough area, to detect any trends, especially in the temperate zones where most people live.Instruments have shown for certain that UV-B has risen significantly in Antarctica, where ozone depletion has been the most severe. A few measurements in temperate zones also indicate an increase.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 1995, on Page C00004 of the National edition with the headline: Study of Cloud Patterns Points to Many Areas Exposed to Big Rises inUltraviolet Radiation. 
In only five years, the gambling industry has bought its way into the ranks of the most formidable interest groups in American politics, spending huge sums  to gain the kind of influence long wielded by big business, big labor and organizations of doctors and lawyers.From the Empress riverboat casino in Joliet, Ill., to the Mashantucket Pequot tribe in Ledyard, Conn., gambling interests, which now run casinos in 24 states, have used vast profits gleaned from their craps tables and slot machines to fatten the campaign coffers of political candidates and wage multimillion-dollar lobbying offensives.While state officials have been the primary beneficiaries of the industry's  largesse, there has also been a surge in contributions to Federal and local officeholders.Gambling-financed political action committees gave three times as much to Congressional candidates and the national parties in the 1993-94 election cycle  as they gave in the previous two years, according to Common Cause and the Center for Responsive Politics, two Washington-based organizations that monitor campaign financing. The $2 million total for the cycle put the industry in the same league as long-established interest groups like the United Automobile Workers, which gave $2.4 million, and the National Rifle Association, which gave $2.2 million.AdvertisementAt the state level, meanwhile, the rising tide of gambling money has in many  places become a flood. In Florida last year, pro-gambling forces spent $16.5 million in an unsuccessful effort to win approval of casinos in a referendum. That sum was almost as much as the state's two gubernatorial candidates spent combined.In other states, the industry's wealth has allowed it to outspend its opponents by as much as 50 to 1. In the process, that wealth has contributed to  major corruption scandals in Louisiana, Missouri, Arizona, Kentucky, South Carolina and West Virginia, all since 1989, when legalized gambling began its cross-country expansion.Perhaps most significant, the torrent of dollars has rapidly eroded a longstanding stigma against the intermingling of gambling and politics."Twenty years ago, if you got support from gambling interests it would have been the kiss of death," said one Federal lawmaker, Representative Frank R. Wolf, a Virginia Republican who opposes the continued expansion of gambling. "If you were running for office in Illinois or Iowa and got money from gambling interests, you wouldn't want to tell your brother or mother."Noting that today's casinos are run by Indian tribes and Fortune 500 companies, not mobsters, gambling industry officials assert that it is only natural for a heavily regulated, high-growth business to play an active role in  politics, just as public utilities and tobacco companies do."The only industry that is more regulated is the nuclear power industry," said Mark B. Edwards Jr., a gambling analyst for the State Capital Resource Center, a private group that monitors political developments for casino companies. "Therefore, it's more important for the gaming industry to flex some  political muscle. A lot of it is the nature of the beast."The gaming industry has focused its lobbying campaigns on state capitals, where governors, lawmakers and regulators hold the authority to determine whether to expand gambling, which companies will get gambling licenses and vending contracts, and how extensively gambling will be taxed and controlled.Gambling opponents say the abundance of lobbying money, and the promise of bountiful tax revenue, has helped the industry move its operations into impoversished communities, with little attention paid to social consequences.AdvertisementA backlash has begun to emerge in which grass-roots anti-gambling drives in some states have managed to neutralize the influence of big money. But that is no easy task. In the last two years, campaigns to establish or expand legalized gambling in Florida, Missouri, Virginia and Connecticut have spent more money than was ever before spent in those states on any lobbying effort.During Virginia's legislative session this year, gambling interests hired 48  lobbyists. In Texas, they hired 74, more than two for every state senator and one for every two members of the Texas House.The lobbyists are often enlisted from the ranks of former public officials. The lobbying payroll in Illinois has included a former governor, a former state  attorney general, a former state police director, two former United States attorneys, a former mayor of Chicago and dozens of former state legislators, including a Senate president and a House majority leader.Two years ago a Nevada casino company, Primadonna Resorts, offered two Illinois lobbyists a compensation package of $20 million over 20 years if they could reel in a riverboat license. (They have yet to do so.)For an April 1994 referendum on allowing slot machines in Missouri, committees financed by out-of-state casino companies paid out $4.2 million, outspending the proposal's opponents by 50 to 1, according to a study by Alfred  Kahn, a retired professor of planning at Southern Illinois University, at Edwardsville. The measure failed by one-tenth of a percentage point. Seven months later, the gambling companies were back, this time spending $11.5 million. The proposal passed with 54 percent of the vote.The gambling opponents, Mr. Kahn said, "were just overwhelmed by wall-to-wall television commercials."'It's a Sea Change In the Political Landscape'Like lobbying expenditures, campaign contributions have been flowing as freely as complimentary cocktails on a casino floor. Only one state, New Jersey, prohibits political contributions from gambling interests.In Louisiana, gambling interests in 1993 and 1994 gave state legislators more than twice as much as did the petrochemical industry, a study by The Times-Picayune of New Orleans showed.Advertisement"I've been told by legislator after legislator that the gambling industry has become the single largest political influence in their states," said Robert Goodman, a professor at Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass., who is the author of "The Luck Business" (Free Press, 1995), a book critical of legalized gambling's spread. "It's a sea change in the political landscape in the states where the gambling industry is operating."As in many other states that now have casinos, the spending in Illinois has been spurred by competition among gambling concerns whose interests conflict.Wealthy businessmen who want casino licenses, which now allow casino gambling only on riverboats, are spending hundreds of thousands of dollars a year in campaign contributions to help persuade legislators to expand gambling to Chicago and suburbs. Fearful of new competition, the owners of the state's 10 existing licenses are contributing hundreds of thousands more to protect their monopolies. In doing so, they have placed themselves in an unusual alliance with those who oppose gambling on moral or social grounds.In Washington, the rise of the gambling industry has created influential power brokers. In a single afternoon last June, Steve Wynn, chairman of Mirage Resorts, one of the country's largest casino companies, raised nearly $500,000 for the Presidential campaign of Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader. The fund-raising luncheon, at a posh Las Vegas country club, came one day after Mr.  Dole had traveled to Los Angeles to level a withering attack on what he described as the mercenary values of the entertainment industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dole opposes new taxes on the gambling industry, said his spokesman, Clarkson Hine, but supports creation of a Federal commission to study gambling's effects. The industry opposes such a commission, believing that it could lead to heightened regulation. But Mr. Hine said Mr. Dole "feels strongly" that regulation should be left to the states.In any event, Mirage Resorts is hardly the only gambling-industry player in the capital. The 370-member Mashantucket Pequot tribe, virtually unknown until it opened the Foxwoods Resort Casino in Ledyard, Conn., in 1992, is one of many  others, having given $465,000 to the Democratic National Committee and $100,000  to the Republican National Committee from 1991 to 1994.Gambling money is so abundant that on occasion it reaches out even to the most vocal of gambling opponents, like Gov. Kirk Fordice of Mississippi, where casino operations have been growing for five years.In 1993, Mr. Fordice accepted $73,500 in contributions from casino interests, almost a third of all the money he raised that year. Then, beginning last Jan. 1, he swore off accepting any more gambling money, although he declined to return the earlier bounty. The purpose of the new policy, said Andy Taggart, his campaign manager, was to take an issue away from his opponent this year. Mr. Fordice won.First the Boom, Then a BacklashIt was political money, along with the promise of new tax revenue for recession-racked states, that provided the kindling for the wildfire spread of legalized gambling in the 1990's.AdvertisementIn 1988, only Nevada and New Jersey had casinos. Now, 24 states have casinos  on land, water or Indian reservations, and 48 states have legalized gambling of  some kind. In the last four years, annual legal-gambling revenue has grown by 50 percent, to $39.9 billion. That is nearly a quadrupling since 1982, according to an annual survey by Christiansen/Cummings Associates, a consulting firm that specializes in the gaming industry. On average, profit margins are high, ranging from 15 to 20 percent, said Will E. Cummings, managing director of the firm."Without the outside influence coming in" to lobby in this state or that, "there would be no spread of gaming," said William N. Thompson, a professor at the University of Nevada at Las Vegas who is co-author of "The Last Resort: Success and Failure in Campaigns for Casinos" (University of Nevada Press, 1990). "The opponents don't get to make their case."In the last year, though, the industry has suffered several financial and political failures, suggesting that the market for betting may finally be saturated. A casino in New Orleans and riverboats in Louisiana and Mississippi have failed, and voters and lawmakers have rejected the expansion of gambling in a number of states.Industry analysts say some of the backlash can be attributed to growing revulsion with the amount of gambling money in politics, and to concern about corruption among holders of public office.In the most recent scandal, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said in August that it was investigating whether video poker operators in Louisiana had  bribed lawmakers into killing anti-gambling legislation earlier this year. That  inquiry is continuing, but many of the legislators who are targets of it either  have chosen to retire or failed to win re-election this fall.In Pennsylvania, State Attorney General Ernie Preate Jr. pleaded guilty in June to hiding campaign contributions from operators of illegal video poker games. And from 1989 to 1992, lawmakers in Arizona, Kentucky, South Carolina and West Virginia were convicted of accepting bribes from gambling interests.Much 'Like a Bull In a China Shop'Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., president of the American Gaming Association, the industry's trade group, told a Congressional committee last month that singling  out legalized betting as a corrupting influence was unfair."The problem," said Mr. Fahrenkopf, a former Republican national chairman, "is that where there is money, there is the potential for corruption, and that is by no means confined to gaming interests." After listing political scandals from Teapot Dome to Abscam, he added, "To suggest that it is unique to our industry is manipulative, cynical and, frankly, dishonest."AdvertisementEven when operating within the law, though, gambling supporters have sometimes lacked subtlety.In 1994, the president of the Louisiana Senate, Sammy Nunez, handed out envelopes to colleagues on the Senate floor, each containing a $2,500 campaign check from a casino owner. Mr. Nunez lost in a bid for re-election in November.In Illinois in 1993, Al Ronan, a legislator turned casino lobbyist, pulled lawmakers off the floor and handed them white envelopes containing campaign checks of $50 to $300."The gambling companies have been like a bull in a china shop," said William  R. Eadington, director of the Institute for the Study of Gambling and Commercial Gaming, at the University of Nevada at Reno. "These were companies that did not  have the sophistication to understand the nuances of political activity."Some experts, noting the intense issue that gambling money has become in some states and localities, believe that the industry has turned into its own worst enemy.Despite devoting $16.5 million to the referendum on casino legalization in Florida last year, pro-gambling forces were crushed at the polls, 62 percent to  38 percent, at least partly because of voter discomfort with that level of spending.And given the corruption investigation in Louisiana, candidates for governor  there spent much of the race this year trying to trump each other's anti-gambling stands.Further, after the St. Louis County Executive, George Westfall, accepted more than $150,000 in contributions from companies competing for a riverboat casino license, the County Council this year approved a ban on the industry's political donations.In recent months, some casino companies have decided to put a stop to their own multimillion-dollar political wagers.One such company is Mirage Resorts, which spent more than $10 million in a four-year failed campaign to place a casino in Bridgeport, Conn. "Our company policy right now is that we are not going to go out in any jurisdiction and actively lobby to change any law, to actively try to convince people," said Richard D. Bronson, a member of Mirage's board and president of the company's development arm. "Look what happened in Connecticut."AdvertisementAlan M. Feldman, Mirage's vice president for public affairs, added: "It has told us that this isn't our bag. We're just not political animals."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this special report appears in print on December 18, 1995, on Page B00012 of the National edition with the headline: Gambling's New Winnings: A Special Report;Gambling Owners Spend Lavishly To Gain a Voice in Many States. 
SUPPOSEDLY, Harry Galinsky retired last year, on Halloween, after nearly 50 years in the public schools.At 69, one would think he'd earned some rounds of golf and long, lazy visits  with his grandchildren in South Florida.But Polly, who's been married to him the whole time, has given him an F in retirement.Dr. Galinsky teaches education to Rutgers graduate students and heads the Bergen County board that administers special-education programs. These, however, are breezy commitments compared to the job he has just taken on. He has about six weeks to coax an agreement out of people who have been fighting for 10 years. The issue is probably the knottiest and most emotional one in Bergen County: the desegregation of Englewood's schools."It can be done," he said. And should be done, he added, by the parents in the towns involved -- Englewood, Tenafly and 18 surrounding districts -- rather  than leave the state to come up with a solution. "No plan from the outside stands much of a chance of great success," he said.AdvertisementThe problem is that Englewood's Dwight Morrow High School is virtually all black and Hispanic. Englewood itself is nearly half white, but few of its students attend the public high school. Arguments on ending its racial imbalance have been fierce and uncompromising.Eleven years ago, the issue was brought to court. It involved suits and countersuits between Englewood and the wealthy, nearly all-white Englewood Cliffs. Too small to have its own high school, Englewood Cliffs sent its public-school students to Dwight Morrow but wanted the state to let it send them to Tenafly High School, which is largely white and Asian and has some of the highest test scores in the state.The courts refused, and ordered the State Board of Education to study ways of desegregating Dwight Morrow. To increase the pool of students, it brought in 18  surrounding school districts. Last summer, a consultant came up with several suggestions for combining schools. But after hundreds of meetings -- including a series of stormy, crowded public hearings in the towns around Englewood -- and the sides are still deadlocked. People feel that the education and future of their children is at stake."It's mission impossible," said Dr. Galinsky cheerfully. Nevertheless, if anyone can do it, say people on all sides of the controversy, Harry Galinsky is  probably the one. He is a roundly respected, well-liked educator with a long resume that includes teaching and administration in districts both urban and suburban. So it is not surprising that the State Education Commissioner, Leo F.  Klagholz, picked him to make an urgent, last-ditch effort to get people to decide the fate of their schools, as long as it provides a solution to Dwight Morrow's segregation.But while the affected towns seem to agree that Dr. Galinsky is the right man for this job, they disagree -- passionately -- on whether the job should be done at all. Many people, after all, moved to their towns solely for the local public schools. They will not necessarily consider sending their children to regionalized public high schools, even specialized magnet schools. Last week, even the head of the Bergen County N.A.A.C.P., Robert Robinson, joined opponents of forced regionalization, saying: "Racial balance is not the important factor here. Equal and quality education is."But to people who oppose change, Dr. Galinsky is not reassuring. "We have to  get people to understand and accept that the present status quo won't remain," he said.  "There will be change. Things will not be business as usual."However admired Dr. Galinsky may be, however hard people chuckle at his famous jokes -- usually irreverent and interjected during the tensest meetings -- his attempts would probably be wasted were it not for a threat. He doesn't like to voice it -- he is, after all, lauded for his tact and people skills. But everybody knows the threat is there."If we're not successful, ladies and gentlemen," he said, as if addressing a  meeting (though he was sitting at his dining room table, over Mrs. Galinskey's homemade cookies), "the state may make a decision far more onerous than anything we'd come up with."AdvertisementOnerous could mean dissolving well-loved, academically successful high schools and forming a big regional school. It could mean requiring students to be bused far from home. Both specters are incentives to get people to talk and agree on changes.Why was he chosen for the job? "How do I say this without ego?" he replied. "I'm the most respected school administrator in the state. I don't have a vested interest. I have excellent people skills. I'm tenacious. I'm the one person school superintendents and other board members would be willing to sit down with."But why is he bothering? Why not relax, fly South where it's warm? What will  he take away from his hours of listening to arguing people, of chairing meetings punctuated by yells and insults, of coaxing the inflexible to bend?Not money. The state is paying him a consultant's wage, $50 an hour. The money he earned on this actually reduced his Social Security payments. He says he's not sure of the net -- maybe $9,000, maybe $11,000.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."My wife said: 'Why are you doing this? All you're going to get is lots of criticism,' " he said. "I could punt this. But I can't think of anything in my professional career I've punted."I feel passionate about the issues. Eleven years has to be put to bed. Maybe Bergen County can become a model in the country." And then, alluding to the county's wealth, the widespread enthusiasm for good education, and the excellence of many of the schools involved, he added, "If we can't solve this in Bergen County, where can we solve it?"Many feel the same way about Dr. Galinsky."If anyone can pull this off, Harry can," said Russell Major, a retired Englewood school board member who is a proponent of regionalization. "He's a leader among superintendents. He's child-oriented. He's not afraid of controversy. He's a pragmatist, sensitive to the political nature of this. Plus, he's smart."John Fitzsimons, Tenafly's Superintendent, who is opposed to regionalization, said: "He's very well respected. He's a problem-solver. His decisions rest on what's best for the kids. He has a very engaging personality. A good sense of humor."Dr. Galinsky grew up in Hoboken when it was a gritty, cargo-port town, when the very thought of a gentrified Washington Street would have been laughable. He was a gunner on a B-24 during World War II, delivering loads of fuel over the Himalayas in China and India. Afterward, on the G.I. bill, he majored in education at Rutgers. He taught elementary school students and high-school science in Hoboken. He became Hoboken's assistant supintendent and continued that position in several districts.AdvertisementBut one year, when he was deputy supintendent in Paramus, he took over as high school principal. "It was a magical year," he said. "I spent a lot of time  with young people and faculty. I didn't bring the notion that we knew all the answers. I took risks. Things had been languishing for months in channels. My feeling was, it's easier to get forgiveness than permission."It helped enormously, of course, that as deputy superintendent, he would have been the one to give permission to himself. "I would turn my chair and say, 'I have to run this up the line with the deputy super,' " he recalled. He'd swivel  back, face his questioner and announce, "They're going to back it."Now, 20 years later, he and his wife have five grandchildren by their three children, a son in business and two daughters, one a doctor, the other teacher in New York City's Bedford-Stuyvesant. The businessman and the doctor have each  settled in South Florida. When this is over he and Polly are going south to see  them.Two major obstacles to getting it over are attitudes: that the Commissioner won't force a solution and that the courts won't uphold one."People don't understand," he said. "Segregation in this state is illegal."During the next six weeks, he would like to crown a career by seeing very good schools in all of eastern Bergen County. He does not know how to it. But, he said, the towns' residents, together, do. And if the proper solution requires money, well, in Bergen County, it can be found."The solution should come from the grass roots, from people who understand their schools," he said. "I don't want a Nobel Prize. I don't want a Galinsky solution. What I want is to be able to look back in five years and say, 'Difficult as it was, God, great things have happened. That would be an achievement I would treasure for the rest of my life."Harry Aaron GalinskyAGE -- 69BORN -- HobokenEDUCATION -- A.J. Demarest High School (now Hoboken High School); Rutgers University, bachelor's degree in education; N.Y.U., master's in guidance; Rutgers, doctorate inadministration and supervision.CAREER HIGHLIGHTS -- Army Air Force B-24 gunner in China, Burma and India, 1943-45. Elementary school teacher and high school science teacher, guidance counselor, vice principal in Hoboken public schools, 1949-67. Assistant superintendent, Hoboken, 1967-71. Assistant superintendent, then deputy superintendent, Paramus public schools, 1971-80. Superintendent, Morristown public schools, 1980-85. Superintendent, 1984-95. Now president, Bergenj County  Board of Special Services. Named New Jersey superintendent of the year, 1989; received the 1995 jDistinguished Service Award of the American Association of School Administrators.FAMILY -- Married for 48 years to Polly, a retired administrative assistant. Three children.HOBBIES AND INTERESTS -- Sports, particularly the football Giants; playing tennis, reading.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 1995, on Page NJ13 of the National edition with the headline: IN PERSON;Can This Man Untie Bergen's Racial Knot?. 
ONCE again, American guns, carried by American soldiers, are heading into a distant fray, their reception in Bosnia at best uncertain. Memories of Somalia and, still, Vietnam, haunt every military venture overseas.American butter, spread by American corporations investing abroad at a record pace, has meanwhile never been so widely welcomed. Although United States battleships and B-52's have in many places overstayed their welcome, Boeings filled with business executives and Commerce Department aides can land almost anywhere, even at Noi Bai Airport in Hanoi.The new spirit has spread so thoroughly and rapidly, but with so little comment, that it's easy to forget how recently the United States was seen as an  economic Godzilla. Nobody talks about Coca-Colonization anymore -- "Coke welcomes you to Hanoi," say a pair of signs in the shape of giant bottles bracketing the airport highway -- and seldom are Yankees bearing briefcases told to go home.More Jobs at HomeAs most economists agree, direct foreign investment, as distinct from portfolio investment in stocks and bonds, generally raises demand for American goods and services and creates jobs and wealth back home. Although some foreign  spending has shifted jobs abroad, most goes to penetrate overseas markets.AdvertisementIn the first nine months of this year, American direct investment abroad was  running at a record $74 billion annual rate, more than double the 1992 pace. By  now, the world's thirst for American investment is taken for granted, so much so that exceptions seem downright quaint.When noisy Indian nationalists recently halted construction of a $3 billion American power plant and health inspectors shut New Delhi's first Kentucky Fried Chicken, nobody in other countries applauded. Even many Indians snickered. "The  Tale of Two Flies," they called the Kentucky Fried Chicken case, noting that by  local standards, a restaurant with so few deserved to be celebrated, not punished.The rest of the world is competing for American capital, to finance factories, public works, telecommunications, technology transfers and jobs. This nation's capitalists are eager to oblige, and not just in countries recuperating from Communism or rambunctious self-reliance.American products and culture are the rage everywhere. In Japan, consumers allied themselves with the United States Government in pressing officials to open markets. More and more Japanese are learning to eat at McDonald's, shop at  Toys 'R' Us and strike sullen, slouching poses in clothing from the first two Gaps, which opened in September.Western Europe -- which American executives, policymakers and journalists were calling Fortress Europe just a few years ago -- has absorbed by far the most American capital and the greatest absolute increases. Even the largest funeral home chains in France and England have been bought by a Houston-based company determined to sell Europeans the flashy, overengineered coffins that Americans crave. Mon Dieu!And to think of all the trouble the world's revolutionaries and intellectuals took to paint foreign investment in general, American in particular, as colonialism in another ravenous form. Back when banana republics weren't just outfitters for expeditions to shopping mall food courts, they often handed over  their natural resources on foreigners' terms. Lenin's description of foreign investment as economic imperialism captured and colored the outlooks of many emerging nations.Europeans, guided by the likes of Charles de Gaulle, resisted American investment on cultural and political as well as economic grounds. "The Common Market has become a new Far West for American businessmen," the French journalist Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber wrote in "The American Challenge," published in 1968. "Their investments do not so much involve a transfer of capital as an actual seizure of power."French and British universities provided a link to leaders and intellectuals  in the developing world, steeping them in socialism and anti-Americanism while American universities provided technical skills.AdvertisementIn the 1980's, however, foreign investment was flowing so strongly into the United States that many Americans themselves went nationalist. First they feared the flood of Arab petrodollars. Then they were vexed by Japan's superyen, which  bought up the Pebble Beach golf course, Hollywood studios and even Rockefeller Center. Americans demanded barriers, even though the prices were so crazed that  the slogan among many deal makers became, "I have met the greater fool, and he speaks Japanese."Japan's RetreatThe Japanese are still taking their losses, the Europeans just starting to make many of their American acquisitions profitable. And the United States has supplanted a retreating Japan as the major font of foreign investment. No other  country has capitalized so well on the political and philosophical turns of the  late 1980's.In China, Bill Gates can do what Warren Christopher often can't, which is to  receive a warm smile and hearty clasp from President Jiang Zemin (followed by a  decree making Windows the nation's software standard). In Vietnam, where the United States lifted an embargo on trade and investment last year, Coca-Cola is  already opening its first bottling plant, Mobil is exploring for oil, Caterpillar is leasing equipment and Otis Elevator is busy with installations in new buildings.But the failure of socialism and the ebbing of fears dating to the colonial era only go part way toward explaining America's new popularity. Many countries  are adopting American corporations (calling them multinational has become redundant) as their industrial models.  Asian executives go for business training at Stanford, Latin Americans favor the Ivy League and M.I.T., and British and French universities teach American management skills.Norbert Walter, chief economist at Deutsche Bank, recently wrote in Die Welt, Germany's leading newspaper, that English should become Europe's second language. Some diplomats protested, he said, but scientists and business people  have already made English their universal tongue. These include even the French, he added, "which was impossible to imagine 10 or 15 years ago." Mr. Walter is also on the board of The English Theater in Frankfurt, which recently presented the shamelessly American "Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding."Not that the surge in investment always benefits both sides of the deal. American companies sell drugs abroad that fail safety tests here, foul the environment and deal with apparel contractors who use child labor.Among American workers, tens, probably hundreds of thousands have watched their automobile, apparel and electronics jobs moved to Latin America and Asia.  Companies are even farming out software writing to India.Still TargetsInstead of raising the alarm about foreigners investing in the United States, politicians now search for scapegoats among countries where America itself is spending -- a hunt certain to gather urgency once the next recession hits.In some places, Americans still make inviting targets. Not even the latest innovations in combining shampoo and creme rinse have shaken Muslim fundamentalists from defining the righteous state as one clean of American influence. But even Cuba's Fidel Castro, on his recent trip to New York, shucked his combat fatigues for the let's-make-a-deal look. To meet with people  named Rockefeller and Tisch, he wore a business suit.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 1995, on Page 4004001 of the National edition with the headline: YANKEE COME BACK;American Money Makes the Whole World Sing. 
BROTHERS GOURMET COFFEES INC., Boca Raton, Fla., named David B. Vermylen, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman. CIRCLE K CORP., Phoenix, appointed John Antioco, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman, succeeding Bart A. Brown Jr., who resigned to become chairman and chief executive of Color Tile Inc. of Fort Worth. FORD MOTOR CO., Dearborn, Mich., appointed Vaughn Koshkarian, its director of international automotive operations strategy and associations, to the position of president of Ford China Operations, succeeding Jim Paulsen, who retires in October.  POLO RALPH LAUREN, New York, promoted John Idol, previously president of the Ralph Lauren Home Collection, to the new position of group president and chief operating officer. Ken Rood, previously vice president of sales, will assume Mr. Idol's former post. QUANTUM CORP., Milpitas, Calif., a maker of computer disk drives, said William Miller had resigned as chairman and chief executive for personal reasons but would remain at Quantum until a replacement was named. WAL-MART STORES INC., Bentonville, Ark., appointed John Menzer, former president and chief operating office of Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc., to executive vice president and chief financial officer, replacing Paul Carter, who will become president of Wal-Mart Realty Co.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 26, 1995, on Page 1001035 of the National edition with the headline: Executive Changes. 
What if a company made a buyout offer to its employees and everybody took it?That is nearly what happened here at the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company, which is in a hurry to trim its work force before its merger early next year with the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company. In recent weeks, after more than two-thirds of the 1,650 employees at Connecticut Mutual's home offices said yes to the offer -- a reflection of dismal morale and jitters about the future, many workers said -- the company found itself wooing those it wanted to stay.Even after extending the deadline for workers to reconsider, and then persuading 220 to remain, the company will lose 890 people.Such a rush for the door -- particularly in Hartford, where insurers have shed thousands of workers in recent years -- came as a surprise to many, and far exceeded the 475 jobs the company said it planned to cut as part of the merger.  Connecticut Mutual now finds itself in the embarrassing position of needing to hire several hundred replacement workers."When that many people take an offer, it suggests a planning problem in the company and a perception problem among its employees," said Marti Smye, chairwoman of People Tech Consulting, a Boston firm. Workers at the smaller company in a merger -- like Connecticut Mutual -- are particularly vulnerable to such problems, experts say.AdvertisementIndeed, Connecticut Mutual's experience is a case study in the potential pitfalls of shrinking a company, experts say. As a cautionary tale, it will have increasing relevance, they add, since layoffs and buyouts are on the rise again  amid a new wave of mergers. One in every six of the 385,000 big company job cuts announced so far this year is the result of a merger, Challenger, Gray & Christmas, a Chicago-based out placement firm, has estimated.As layoffs and buyouts become more of a fact of life, the social stigma for affected workers has been disappearing. As a result, companies should be prepared for many more workers to accept buyout offers that a few years ago would have attracted only a small minority, employment benefits experts say.The risk of too many workers accepting an offer is one reason why offers to all employees are becoming less common, said Garrett L. Dietz, a managing principal at the Towers Perrin consulting firm."Voluntary buyout offers seem like a way to avoid the pain of layoffs, but they can be costly in the long run," he said. "That's why you see so many companies do their downsizing in rounds, offering deals to small groups of workers." Some companies also reserve the right to pick and choose among those who do take an offer, but they leave themselves open to lawsuits by workers who may accuse them of discrimination, Mr. Dietz said.David E. Sams Jr., Connecticut Mutual's chairman and chief executive, is not  expressing any regret over the loss of workers he would rather have kept, and says the company "never had any goal" for the number of people it wanted to take the buyout. By keeping some departing workers on until next June, the company says, the turnover will not disrupt customer service."We wanted to give everyone an equal opportunity to make a choice," Mr. Sams  said, "and the people who now remain are energized and excited." He added that "we achieved our goal of avoiding any involuntary terminations as part of the merger, except at the senior executive level." Connecticut Mutual did not use any of the consulting firms that specialize in advising companies on buyouts.But for many of those leaving, the reason was not the generosity of the offer -- a minimum of half a year's pay for those with at least three years of service -- but rather worry about the rapid pace of change at the company and uncertainty about where they fit in top management's merger plans. And many attributed their anxiety to the 52-year-old Mr. Sams, who joined Connecticut Mutual in 1993 as its first chief executive hired from the outside."A lot of people are fed up with the way they have been treated," said Shirley Brown, an administrative assistant in the real estate investment department who took the buyout and is leaving. "They have been screwing around with everybody's job for two years, since the transformation project, and people can only take so much," she said in an interview.AdvertisementThe "transformation" project was an effort to stir the pot at a company suffering from lagging profits and sales by requiring all employees, except Mr.  Sams, to reapply for their jobs. The company contends that fewer than 100 workers lost their jobs in the project and that it hired enough new workers to actually increase its job rolls. Even so, the exercise left an unpleasant aftertaste for many."I want there to be the right amount of anxiety in the system," Mr. Sams said two years ago in the midst of the project. He conceded then that there was some  danger in trying to cut costs and inject new vigor at a lethargic mutual company that has never had the scrutiny and prodding of shareholders. Mutual insurers are owned by their policyholders.Mr. Sams, formerly a senior executive at the shareholder-owned Providian Corporation of Louisville, Ky., did not come to Connecticut Mutual with a reputation as an ogre. Irving W. Bailey 2d, his boss at Providian, an insurance  and financial services company, expressed surprise over the turmoil at Connecticut Mutual, and described Mr. Sams as "great with the troops" and "certainly not a bull in the china shop."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, although the 1,650 workers at headquarters knew that Connecticut Mutual was promising to keep 1,200 employees, that promise alone was not enough  to assure them of their future prospects. Company executives were not offering the information that many workers wanted to hear -- which jobs would survive, whom they would work for and whether they would be relocated to the Springfield, Mass., headquarters of Massachusetts Mutual."They didn't make available any of the information that a person would need to make a decision," said Lee Otero, a secretary who also took the buyout and is leaving. "With nothing to go on, a lot of people decided they weren't wanted, and should take the money."After 1,110 people said yes, Connecticut Mutual extended to Dec. 6 the deadline to reconsider. In the week leading up to that deadline, company managers began talking in more specific terms with some workers, assuring them that they were wanted and could continue working in Hartford. That, plus an appeal over the company's telephone message system just a few hours before decisions were due, was enough to persuade 220 to stay.But for 890 workers, the appeal did not work, even though the employment outlook in Hartford grew even bleaker in late November when the Aetna Life and Casualty Company said 1,500 insurance jobs would be lost in the sale of its property and liability division to the Travelers Group.The last-minute effort to change some minds "was not because we had kept knowledge of our plans hidden until then," Mr. Sams said. "We are accomplishing  in five months what takes other companies 17 or 18 months to do," he added. Because of the fast pace of the job- cutting, he said, the detailed plans for individuals were not known until very recently.So far, the networks of sales agents at both insurers have been little touched by the merger turmoil, though their day will come. About 1,000 of the least productive agents will be let go as Connecticut Mutual's 2,000 agents merge with the 4,000 at Massachusetts Mutual, said Thomas B. Wheeler, chief executive of Massachusetts Mutual, who will be chairman of the new company, which will use the Massachusetts Mutual name.AdvertisementLarry Mayewski, head of life insurance ratings at the A. M. Best Company, Oldwick, N.J., said that expenses at Connecticut Mutual and Massachusetts Mutual were not high by life insurance company standards, "but the real benchmarks they should be judged by are at mutual funds and banks, their competitors." He said job-cutting could be limited if the new Massachusetts Mutual succeeded in expanding its sales, but if growth did not come, he said, more cuts were likely.Connecticut Mutual executives have promised Gov. John G. Rowland and the state insurance department that when the dust clears the company will still have 1,200 jobs in Hartford and maintain its charitable spending.Most of the remaining jobs will involve such relatively low-paying tasks as handling new policies and collecting premiums. Connecticut Mutual's managerial ranks will be reduced by elimination of many duplicated jobs in public relations, accounting, law and other areas.But Hartford will get some new jobs, too, becoming the home base for Massachusetts Mutual's Oppenheimer Asset Management, a mutual fund company, and  a real estate management and advisory firm."None of this has been any fun," said Mr. Wheeler of Massachusetts Mutual, who was greeted recently with a smattering of hisses and boos at one meeting in  the Connecticut Mutual cafeteria. "But the fact is that these changes are necessary for both companies. Our alternative is to eventually go out of business."TERMS OF THE BUYOUTWORKERS with the company for three years or more were given three weeks pay for  each year of service, with a minimum of 26 weeks pay and a maximum of 78 weeks.HIGHER RANKING EXECUTIVES got four weeks pay for each year of service, with a minimum of 26 weeks and a maximum of 104.THOSE NEAR RETIREMENT were allowed to collect benefits at age 50, rather than 55.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: Company's Buyout: Was It That Good?;Rush to the Doors at an Insurer Shows Pitfalls in Cutting Staff. 
Harvard Coach Tim Murphy has seen again and again what a tough, hard-nosed running back Eion Hu is. Hu, a junior tailback, is his leading rusher this season, with four 100-yard games, a bright spot for a Crimson team with a 1-4 record."Whether it's the last play of the the fourth quarter or just a routine drill in practice, he's giving it 100 percent," Murphy said. "He doesn't know any other way."So Murphy wasn't the least bit surprised when he heard about the first time  Hu stepped onto the football field.Hu was 7 years old at the time. While attending summer camp in the Passaic County town of Wanaque, N.J., he was mistakenly put into a game with players who were almost twice his age.AdvertisementThe mistake occurred because Hu was big for his age, but it didn't deter him. In the heat of the game, he caught an elbow in the right eye, which resulted in  a black eye."We were so excited to see him go to camp and learn to play football and other American sports," said his mother, Kathy Hu, "then the first day he came home with a black eye."It was a rude introduction to football. Hu's parents didn't know what to expect. They were born in the Sichuan Province of China. In 1949, when Kathy Hu was 6 years old and Eion's father, Ching-Yeh, was 8, their respective families fled the mainland for Taiwan."We don't remember too much because we were quite young," said Hu's mother. "It was very dangerous, very scary. My parents told me that the boat that left after us was bombed and that everybody died. That could have been us."After growing up in Taiwan, the Hu's moved to the United States in 1965. Hu's father is a biology professor at William Paterson College in Wayne, N.J.The elder Hu convinced his son not to give up after his initial injury."He told him that we paid for the week and that he should give it more of a chance," his mother said. "By the end of the week, he didn't want to come home."There was never any looking back. Hu became a star halfback at DePaul High School in Wayne, N.J., where he compiled almost 2,000 yards in three seasons and was recognized as one of four National Sports Foundation Scholar Athletes of the Year. In his senior season, he led the Spartans to a state championship.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His success has continued at Harvard. Now a junior, Hu has had nine 100-yard  days for the Crimson. As a sophomore, Hu was named the Ivy League rookie of the  year (freshmen do not play on the varsity) as he ran for 1,123 yards and 11 touchdowns.This season he has rushed for 100 yards in four of five games, and has 613 yards and 7 touchdowns. In a victory over Colgate, Hu had a career-high 3 touchdowns and 235 yards. It was the best single performance by any Harvard back since 1974.AdvertisementThe leader of the Crimson offense is the second-year starting quarterback Vin Ferrara, who played at DePaul's scholastic conference rival, Delbarton. Before coming together to form the bulk of Harvard's offensive attack, Hu and Ferrara met in high school once a year. They both collected Parochial All-State honors in their senior seasons.Hu's biggest fans are his parents. In the few years they have been following  the game, they have became ardent football fans. They attend every Harvard home  game.In the classroom Hu has a B-plus average in economics. After he graduates in  1997, he wants to "get a job in the business world for three or four years" and  then return to Harvard to pursue a master's degree in business administration."When I first got here in the spring of 1994, I knew we had a player in Eion," said Coach Murphy, who went to Harvard after being an assistant at Cincinnati University in 1994. "He's a quick, slashing type of runner, with great field vision."As time went on, I realized what a great kid he was -- and I don't just mean as a football player. At a school filled with extraordinary kids, he still stands out. He's a good student and a good athlete, and he's very humble about it."Murphy's point was proved in an early season 28-27 loss to Cornell, in which  Hu fumbled. It was only his second fumble in more than 500 career carries.Harvard hasn't had a winning season since 1987. But with two 1-point losses on a team comprising mostly of underclassmen, Hu and Murphy are optimistic."We're young and we have to learn to win," Hu said. "We're really a few plays away from being 5-0. If we practice like heck, we could compete for the Ivy League title. If not this year, next year."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 19, 1995, on Page B00016 of the National edition with the headline: FOOTBALL;Black Eye Didn't Stop Crimson Star. 
James Reston, former columnist, Washington correspondent and executive editor of The New York Times, died on Wednesday night at his home here. He was 86.The cause was cancer, said his son Thomas.First as a reporter and then, beginning in 1953, as a columnist, Mr. Reston  was perhaps the most influential journalist of his generation. In Washington, where he was based, and also in other capitals around the world, he had unrivaled access to the high and the mighty. Yet he retained a wry, self-deprecating personality, free of bombast, and always sought to reduce political complexity to plain language."What I try to do," he said, "is write a letter to a friend who doesn't have  time to find out all the goofy things that go on in Washington."Interested in China and the Soviet Union as well as the United States, a student of diplomacy as well as domestic politics, he won two Pulitzer Prizes and dozens of other awards.AdvertisementMr. Reston was forgiving of the frailties of soldiers, statesmen and party hacks -- too forgiving, some of his critics later said, because he was too close to them. But his stern moral standards, rooted in the Victorian values of his youth, never wavered. He remained an idealist in a world of cynics.From his strong-minded mother he inherited a Presbyterian conscience and an abiding sense of duty and responsibility. Work hard, he was taught. Work for large goals that transcend self-interest.A talent scout of prodigious capacity, Mr. Reston hired and trained many of The Times's best-known journalists, and served as mentor to many more. To each of them, he passed along a lifetime's lessons about craft and country.Mr. Reston's 50-year association with The Times began when he joined its London bureau on Sept. 1, 1939, the day Hitler's armies marched into Poland, igniting World War II. It was a fitting day on which to start his career at the  paper, much of which would be spent recording and reflecting upon the aftermath  of that fateful day.His nationally syndicated column appeared regularly until 1987, when he became senior columnist. He retired from The Times in 1989, without ceremony, on his 80th birthday.In an interview marking the occasion, he said the two greatest political triumphs in his lifetime had been the common defense system developed by the West after World War II and the improvement in the lot of black people in America since 1960.Mr. Reston, who was born in Scotland, described the men who met in Philadelphia in 1787 to draft the Constitution as the great heroes in his adopted country's history. The document that they produced, he said, made possible "the triumph of the moderates" over the next two centuries.A moderate himself, hostile to both fascism and communism, he described journalism's role in their eclipse as "one of the great pleasures of my life."AdvertisementAsked whom he had most admired, he cited Franklin D. Roosevelt as the finest  President he had known and Dean Acheson, Secretary of State in the Truman Administration, as "the key man" who "came to the fork in the road" and concluded that containing the Soviet Union would require a new alliance.But he chose Jean Monnet, the French visionary who conceived the European Community, as the greatest man he had ever known as well as the person who had most deeply influenced his own thinking. Monnet proved, Mr. Reston often said, that "if you don't demand credit for things, you can push them through."First and Foremost, A Dogged ReporterMr. Reston thought of himself primarily as a reporter, and he often beat his  competitors to be the first to write about major news events. His coverage of the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in Washington in 1944, which laid the groundwork for the United Nations, was one of the era's most important exclusives and won him his first Pulitzer, in 1945. Those articles disclosed the substance of secret documents that were then being circulated among delegations from the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and China on the structure of the proposed international organization.Mr. Reston won his second Pulitzer in 1957 for distinguished reporting from Washington. The articles cited were written in June 1956 and analyzed the effects of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's illness on the functioning of the executive branch.He was also responsible for The Times's publication in 1955 of the documents  of the 1945 Yalta Conference. And in 1954 he disclosed that J. Robert Oppenheimer, who had directed the making of the first atomic bomb, had subsequently been denied access to secret documents by the Atomic Energy Commission because of suspicion that he was passing information to the Soviet Union, a charge of which Oppenheimer was later cleared.One exclusive dispatch came by accident. In 1971, as one of the first American reporters allowed into China, Mr. Reston developed appendicitis. His report about his surgery and postoperative acupuncture treatment, filed from his bed in the Anti-Imperialist Hospital in the capital, ran on the front page under the headline "Now, About My Operation in Peking."'My Own Opinions Aren't That Good'From the 1950's on, Mr. Reston interviewed most of the world's leaders, often producing major news accounts that were scrutinized at the State Department for  their every nuance. The interviews often bore the special Reston stamp: He sought to reveal not only the policies and the politics of the people he interviewed, but also their vision of life and their view of history.Mr. Reston, who was called Scotty by virtually everyone who knew him, was 5 feet 8 inches tall and had a round and ruddy face, gray-green eyes, an ever-present pipe and an invariably pleasant manner. He was courteous not only to officials but also to the young people who worked for him.Advertisement"He believes in hard work, in thrift, honor your parents, woman's place is in the home, play by the rules and live clean," his colleague Russell Baker once said.Mr. Reston was credited by competitors with having more high-level news sources in Washington than almost any other reporter, although some critics felt that he was too kind in print to some of them. The economist John Kenneth Galbraith, reviewing Mr. Reston's "The Artillery of the Press," a 1967 collection of his talks before the Council on Foreign Relations, suggested that  Mr. Reston had learned to his disadvantage "to treat all people in the manner of a newspaperman who must one day go back and see them again."But in a 1980 article in The New Republic, Mr. Reston was quoted as saying: "If you spend your life as a hatchet man -- and there's something to be said for that -- then eventually you find that everybody's out to lunch when you call. You're left with only your own opinion. I wouldn't like that because my own opinions aren't that good."Writing his column three times a week, Mr. Reston was a procrastinator, often filing right on deadline. A two-finger typist, he regularly wore out typewriters because he banged so hard on the keys, and his desk was a litter of papers, many of which bore tiny black marks where a stream of smoldering matches had landed in the course of a never-ending pipe-lighting ritual.His columns, laced with quotations from Walter Lippmann, H. G. Wells, Matthew Arnold and Churchill, were a combination of high moral tone, detailed reporting, allusions to sports, impish humor and evocative descriptions of seasonal changes along the Potomac. They seldom offered absolute judgments about people or events; he used the word "maybe" more than most pundits.His first column, on Oct. 18, 1953, established the Reston style."This town is still full of echoes from the days of America's isolation," he  wrote of Washington. "It has changed in policy and personnel, more than any other world capital in the last generation. No nation has taken on so much or moved so far in such a hurry. Yet the habits of the past, like the bent figures  of homeless former senators, still haunt the capital."Press and Politics: 'Like Cats and Dogs'He often returned to certain themes, such as the role of the press. In his column of Oct. 30, 1968, when Spiro T. Agnew, soon to be elected Vice President, was denouncing news organizations, Mr. Reston wrote:"The candidates and the press are fussing at each other again, and this is the way it should be. They have different jobs, and in many ways they are natural enemies, like cats and dogs. The first job of the candidate is to win, and he usually says what he thinks will help him win. The job of the reporter is to report what happens and decontaminate as much of the political poison as he can. The conflict is obvious."In addition to his two Pulitzer Prizes, Mr. Reston was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1986 and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Award in 1991.  He received the Overseas Press Club award for interpretation of international news three times, the George Polk Memorial Award for national reporting and the French Legion of Honor, and was named Commander,  Order of the British Empire. He also received 28 honorary degrees.AdvertisementAfter retiring, he fulfilled a longtime promise to his wife, Sally, by writing his memoirs. Titled "Deadline," they were published by Random House in 1991.Reviewing the book for The New York Times, Ronald Steel, author of "Walter Lippmann and the American Century," called Mr. Reston "the quintessential Washington insider.""Officials used him to test out new ideas on the public or to drop leaks for  which they did not want to be held accountable," Mr. Steel wrote. "Because of his high position at The Times and his personal integrity, he was trusted both by those who provided the news and by those who read it. "But what he did so well and so usefully for so long could not be done today. Journalism and the political world have changed too much."Mr. Reston is survived by his wife; his sons, Richard F. Reston of Edgartown, Mass., James B. Reston Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., and Thomas B. Reston of Washington; his sister, Joanna Richey of Santa Cruz, Calif., and five grandchildren.Funeral services will be held at 10 A.M. on Saturday at Saint Albans Church on the grounds of the Washington National Cathedral.Born in Scotland To Years of PovertyJames Barrett Reston began life about as far from the Washington power center as one could get.He was born in Clydebank, Scotland, on Nov. 3, 1909, the son of James, a machinist, and Johanna Irving Reston. The Restons migrated to the United States  when he was an infant, but Mrs. Reston became ill, and the family returned to Scotland.There followed years of harsh poverty, of life in a brick tenement where young James and his sister slept crosswise at the foot of their parents' bed. In 1920 the family returned to the United States and settled in Dayton, Ohio. His father worked for the Delco Remy Division of General Motors.AdvertisementWhen his parents were naturalized, young James automatically became an American citizen. In 1932, he graduated from the University of Illinois with an  undistinguished academic record. He had majored in journalism, skipping the course in governmental reporting but getting an A in sportswriting.During his high school years he caddied at the Dayton Country Club golf course. His own game became so good that he twice won the Ohio state public links championship and at Illinois was captain of the Big Ten championship golf  team in 1932. His father wanted him to become a golf pro. His mother wanted him  to be a preacher, which, he was to say later, is really what he became.In the winters during his school days, he hung around The Dayton Daily News.  "When the phone rang, I'd pick it up and take down the scores," he later recalled. "And from that I just moved into newspapering. I never thought of anything else."Another link to the world of newspapers was Gov. James M. Cox, the Ohio publisher and 1920 Democratic Presidential candidate, for whom young Reston had  caddied. Mr. Cox gave him his first job after college on one of the Cox newspapers in Ohio, The Springfield Daily News, where he earned $10 a week as the sports editor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Later he was hired as traveling secretary and publicity director for the Cincinnati Reds baseball team. In 1934 he moved to New York as a sportswriter for the Associated Press Feature Service.The next year he married Sally Jane Fulton, a former college classmate who had been president of her sorority, an A student and a Phi Beta Kappa in her junior year. Named Sara but always called Sally, she was the daughter of a judge from Sycamore, Ill., a small town near Chicago.Mr. Reston once told a University of Illinois graduating class, "I should say in passing that I myself married a recklessly beautiful girl whom I first saw on Wright Street wearing a scarlet coat.""My gal Sal," as he called her in the dedication of "Sketches in the Sand," a collection of his columns published in 1967, became his closest confidante, frequent collaborator and steadiest supporter.They had three sons, and Mr. Reston's own happy situation made him a champion of marriage. He was forever asking his young bachelor colleagues when they were  going to wed.AdvertisementIn 1937 The Associated Press sent Mr. Reston to London on a rather loose dual assignment: in summer covering sports events, in winter the British Foreign Office.In 1939 he joined The Times's London bureau, with a salary of $85 a week. He  was so little known on the foreign desk in New York that his first byline in The Times had his name wrong -- John instead of James.Then came the London blitz. The Times's office for much of the war was on the seventh floor of the Reuters Building on Fleet Street, which offered a view of the dome of St. Paul's Cathedral. He described this view of the battle in his first book, "Prelude to Victory.""Before we got better sense, we used to put the lights off in the Times office every night and watch this effort," he wrote. "With uncanny regularity, the German bombers would come over just about 10 minutes after blackout and start dropping incendiary bombs all over this section. About an hour before we could see the flames, we would begin to hear the steady throb of scores of engines along the banks of the Thames; these were the pumps, driving the muddy water from the river up through miles of new hose. . . ."A little later the sky would begin to change in color from midnight blue to  a reddish glow, and soon the great dome of the cathedral would stand out in silhouette against the flames of perhaps a dozen raging fires. Night after night we watched this incredible scene, and morning after morning we marveled at the fact that the fires were somehow put out."In December 1940 he was reassigned to Washington, and in 1942 published "Prelude to Victory," a call to action that was acclaimed here and abroad. Its theme was pure Reston: Unless Americans put aside personal aims and materialistic thinking and made sacrifices in a crusade for their country, the war would not be won.In late 1942, Elmer Davis, head of the Office of War Information, obtained a  leave of absence from The Times for Mr. Reston and sent him to London to set up  the agency's effort there.John G. Winant, the United States Ambassador to Britain, recommended him to Arthur Hays Sulzberger, then president and publisher of The Times, who was looking for an assistant. It was the beginning of Mr. Reston's close friendship  with the Sulzberger family.AdvertisementAfter the War Years, Washington for GoodMr. Reston returned to Washington and was named national correspondent in 1945. He made his mark with his coverage of Dumbarton Oaks, which illustrated a  Reston maxim: Seek out the disgruntled party. His theory was that people who were disenchanted were more likely to talk candidly.In this case, it was the Chinese representatives to the conference who were disenchanted. In his memoirs, Mr. Reston told of having met Chen Yi, one of the  Chinese delegates, before the war through Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger, wife of The  Times's publisher. At Mr. Reston's urging, Chen Yi slipped him the texts of the  proposals.Instead of writing one long article, Mr. Reston doled out the information, producing an exclusive a day. The Russians thought Washington had leaked the material; Washington suspected the British, and the F.B.I.  started an investigation of Mr. Reston.In 1948 Mr. Reston became diplomatic correspondent for The Times, and in 1953 he became Washington bureau chief, succeeding Arthur Krock. He continued as bureau chief until 1964, when he elected to step down to concentrate on his column.In 1968 he was summoned to New York by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, who had become publisher, to succeed Turner Catledge as executive editor, in charge of the entire news operation. The internal politics of the news department had received publicity after an unsuccessful effort by editors in New York to exert more control over the Washington bureau. Mr. Reston's mandate was to re-establish peace.For 13 months he ran the news department while commuting to Washington a few  times a week to write his column. It was an almost impossible job. In 1969, knowing that he had to choose between his column and the editor's post, he gladly chose the column.Mr. Reston was eminently a Washington man. He loved and understood the capital. Moreover, he had helped shape the Washington bureau. These were his people, and many of them regarded him as a father figure. The New York office seemed to him a vast, impersonal beehive.During these years the Restons lived in a pleasant red brick house on Woodley Road in leafy northwest Washington and spent weekends at their log cabin in Fiery Run, Va. Mr. Reston often used Fiery Run as the dateline on his Thoreau-like columns about the restorative life in the country.AdvertisementIn 1968 the Restons purchased The Vineyard Gazette, a 122-year-old weekly on  Martha's Vineyard, Mass., where they vacationed in the summer. Their son Richard is now editor and publisher, and his wife, Mary Jo, is publisher and general manager. Two Cuba Episodes And the Pentagon PapersMr. Reston played a part in the publication of the Pentagon Papers in 1971 and in two other major news events involving The Times in questions of national  security. The others were the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.In the spring of 1961, The Times was preparing to publish an article by Tad Szulc reporting that 5,000 or 6,000 Cuban exiles who had been training in the United States and in Central America for nine months were about to launch an invasion of Cuba to overthrow the regime of Fidel Castro.The article was planned for page 1 on April 7, under a four-column headline.  But Orvil Dryfoos, then the publisher, was troubled by the security implications of the report. On April 6, he and Mr. Catledge, then managing editor, telephoned Mr. Reston, who advised them not to publish the article and cautioned against giving away the proposed timing of the landing as "imminent."The article was published on April 7 under a one-column headline and with no  mention of the invasion's date. The Bay of Pigs invasion took place 10 days later and ended in debacle. President John F. Kennedy, who took full responsibility, said that if The Times had published more about the operation, it might have saved the Administration from making such a colossal mistake."If I had it to do over, I would do exactly what we did at the time," Mr. Reston said later. "It is ridiculous to think that publishing the fact that the  invasion was imminent would have avoided this disaster."In 1962 Mr. Reston was apparently the only reporter who had found out that the Soviet Union, then under the leadership of Nikita S. Khrushchev, had secreted nuclear missiles in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida. When Kennedy realized that Mr. Reston had the information, he telephoned him directly.Four years later, Mr. Reston recounted the incident to Clifton Daniel, then managing editor of The Times.Advertisement"The President told me that he was going on television on Monday evening to report to the American people," Mr. Reston recalled. "He said that if we published the news about the missiles, Khrushchev could actually give him an ultimatum before he went on the air."I told the President I would report to my office in New York," Mr. Reston continued. "And if my advice was asked, I would recommend that we not publish. It was not my duty to decide."Kennedy then called Mr. Dryfoos, the publisher, and asked him not to print Mr. Reston's article. Mr. Dryfoos left the matter up to Mr. Reston and his staff, and the article was withheld.It was a different story, however, in 1971 when The Times obtained and published what became known as the Pentagon Papers, the Government's top-secret  documents on the Vietnam War. Seeing this at once as "the story of the century," Mr. Reston was one of the editors who felt that the documents should be published because they were history and therefore no question of national security was involved.One of Mr. Reston's contributions to journalism was the corps of young reporters he discovered and developed.In 1961 he instituted a program of internships for young would-be reporters,  modeled on the clerkships at the United States Supreme Court and suggested to him by the late Justice Felix Frankfurter. Each year he would recruit a new college graduate as his clerk and researcher. He paid a price for this program,  as time and again the young clerks with lofty journalistic thoughts would mix up his airline reservations or keep the Secretary of State waiting because they had failed to cancel a scheduled appointment.Linda Greenhouse, who went on to report on the Supreme Court for The Times, recalled that on her first day as a clerk, Mr. Reston asked her to get Ted Sorensen on the phone and suggested she try Paul Weiss in New York. After trying every Weiss-comma-Paul in the Manhattan phone book, she reported back to Mr. Reston."He didn't groan, tear his hair or -- more important, and the reason for my undying gratitude -- laugh at me," Ms. Greenhouse said. "He gently explained that Paul, Weiss was a New York law firm where Ted Sorensen was working, looked  up the number and gave it to me."It was perhaps this quality, this unfailing kindliness, that constituted his  special attractiveness. It enabled him to view the faults and frailties of the world with compassion and to carry on in the belief that the best in mankind would eventually win out over the worst.Advertisement"Stick with the optimists, Niftie," he wrote in a column in February 1980, welcoming his new grandson, Devin Fitzgerald Reston, to the human race. "It's going to be tough enough even if they're right."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this obituary; biography appears in print on December 8, 1995, on Page B00017 of the National edition with the headline: James Reston, for Many Years a Nonpareil Among American Journalists,Dies at 86. 
Foreign policy came calling at the White House again today. Despite President Clinton's early inclination to shun it, it has been a frequent visitor, and lately an increasingly welcome one, not least because he has managed a series of visible accomplishments overseas.Whether progress abroad will continue, whether the Administration will find ways to develop broader foreign-policy themes in place of improvisations, whether Mr. Clinton will derive any political benefit in his re-election campaign -- those questions hung in the air this afternoon as he promised to press forward in the Middle East "until the circle of peace is closed."By itself, foreign policy is not often decisive in American Presidential elections. Occasionally, like Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968, Presidents stumble so badly that they are unre-electable. But other Presidents have triumphed in foreign wars and still lost, like George Bush in 1992.Still, foreign policy is a major element in the subtle process by which the electorate takes the measure of a President. If he seems out of his depth in dealing with other countries, if he seems unfit to handle a crisis, if he allows the United States to be embarrassed abroad, he is sure to pay a price. That happened to Harry S. Truman early in his term, and it happened to President Clinton too as he endured mishaps in Somalia and Haiti.AdvertisementMr. Clinton has never been highly regarded in this department by the American voter. In New York Times/CBS News polls that began in March 1993, his second full month in office, his foreign-policy approval rating has never risen above 53 percent (in the first poll), and it has most often been under 40 percent. Last month, before the latest burst of activity, the figures stood at 36 percent approval, 48 percent disapproval, the rest undecided.In the South, his home region, where considerable emphasis is placed on the President's role as Commander in Chief, Mr. Clinton has fared even less well. That is one big reason why he seems unlikely to carry many states there.The 1996 election is more than a year away, of course, and voters can change their minds in a hurry. But Mr. Clinton will need good luck and then some if he is to get a political bounce out of his improved foreign-policy fortunes.Thus far it has been one step at a time for Mr. Clinton, with little drama. So this afternoon's event marking limited Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank, like the one on the White House lawn two years ago that produced the famous handshake of reconciliation, provided some badly needed political theatrics.Today's set-piece celebrated the agreement between Israel and the Palestinians in grand style, with a visit to the Oval Office by Yasir Arafat, a man who until recently was regularly denounced there as a villainous killer. Most of the credit, no doubt, accrues to the principals, but the United States played the midwife's role with skill and without too much self-praise, and the moment had the genuine aroma of history.The agreement was incremental, a single step on a long path. A last-minute dispute over tiny details delayed the signing. Two peoples who hate each other as much as these two have (and in some cases still do) could easily career off that path before they reach the goal: peace.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even if they do not, it is hard to see how such deeply rooted disputes as those over the status of Jerusalem and the creation of a unitary Palestinian state will be resolved.One reason for caution was the absence of the leaders of Syria and Lebanon. President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and King Hussein of Jordan joined Mr. Arafat, Mr. Clinton and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel at the White House, but the others will be needed for a comprehensive settlement of the hostilities that have marred the region since the end of World War II.But in the post-cold-war world, partial solutions seem to be the norm. The days of sweeping agreements, like those between the United States and the Soviet Union on nuclear weapons, seem to have passed, at least for the moment.AdvertisementEven the Western Europeans, negotiating as it were among close relatives, find the road to unity remains open only if it is traveled at low speed. Responding to the energy and intensity of Richard C. Holbrooke, the American negotiator, the combatants in Bosnia have edged closer to agreement. But they are still fighting, and there is no consensus yet on exactly how the contested lands should be divided.China has agreed not to sell nuclear reactors to Iran, but in a spectacular instance of cutting off one's nose to spite one's face, China has rejected the long-sought invitation for a meeting between Mr. Clinton and President Jiang Zemin because it did not come with a promise of 21-gun salutes, a state dinner and Chinese flags fluttering along Pennsylvania Avenue. China's abysmal human-rights record continues unbroken, but at least Beijing is talking.Despite its historic links to the Serbs, Russia has stayed involved with the Bosnian peace effort, even when it included NATO bombing of Bosnian Serb positions. But trouble may lie ahead in trying to blend Russian with NATO troops in any peacekeeping force, and it is not clear whether Moscow will sit still for NATO expansion into central Europe on the American model.For a President who came to office with little knowledge of the world, chose a Secretary of State whose strength lies in quiet backroom dealings and not in bold actions, and picked a national security adviser who has alienated many longtime colleagues with his deviousness, Mr. Clinton is not doing at all badly.Somalia and Haiti are both calm, as Somalia and Haiti go, and the recognition of Vietnam, closing a chapter of pain, has occasioned little outcry. None of those things seemed very likely only a year or so ago.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this an analysis; news analysis appears in print on September 29, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: MIDEAST ACCORD: THE POLITICS; Score One for Clinton. 
James Reston, former columnist, Washington correspondent and executive editor of The New York Times, died tonight at his home here. He was 86.The cause was cancer, said his son Thomas.First as a reporter and then, beginning in 1953, as a columnist, Mr. Reston  was perhaps the most influential journalist of his generation. In Washington, where he was based, and also in other capitals around the world, he had unrivaled access to the high and the mighty. Yet he retained a wry, self-deprecating personality, free of bombast, and always sought to reduce political complexity to plain language."What I try to do," he said, "is write a letter to a friend who doesn't have  time to find out all the goofy things that go on in Washington."Interested in China and the Soviet Union as well as the United States, a student of diplomacy as well as domestic politics, he won two Pulitzer Prizes and dozens of other awards.AdvertisementMr. Reston was forgiving of the frailties of soldiers, statesmen and party hacks -- too forgiving, some of his critics later said, because he was too close to them. But his stern moral standards, rooted in the Victorian values of his youth, never wavered. He remained an idealist in a world of cynics.From his strong-minded mother he inherited a Presbyterian conscience and an abiding sense of duty and responsibility. Work hard, he was taught. Work for large goals that transcend self-interest. Be cooperative. Be modest.A talent scout of prodigious capacity, Mr. Reston hired and trained many of The Times's best-known journalists, and served as mentor to many more. To each of them, he passed along a lifetime's lessons about craft and country.Mr. Reston's 50-year association with The Times began when he joined its London bureau on Sept. 1, 1939, the day Hitler's armies marched into Poland, igniting World War II. It was a fitting day on which to start his career at the  paper, much of which would be spent recording and reflecting upon the aftermath  of that fateful day.His nationally syndicated column appeared regularly until 1987, when he became senior columnist. He retired from The Times in 1989, without ceremony, on his 80th birthday.In an interview marking the occasion, he said the two greatest political triumphs in his lifetime had been the common defense system developed by the West after World War II and the improvement in the lot of black people in America since 1960.Mr. Reston, who was born in Scotland, described the men who met in Philadelphia in 1787 to draft the Constitution as the great heroes in his adopted country's history. The document that they produced, he said, made possible "the triumph of the moderates" over the next two centuries.A moderate himself, hostile to both fascism and communism, he described journalism's role in their eclipse as "one of the great pleasures of my life."AdvertisementAsked whom he had most admired, he cited Franklin D. Roosevelt as the finest  President he had known and Dean Acheson, Secretary of State in the Truman Administration, as "the key man" who "came to the fork in the road" and concluded that containing the Soviet Union would require a new alliance.But he chose Jean Monnet, the French visionary who conceived the European Community, as the greatest man he had ever known as well as the person who had most deeply influenced his own thinking. Monnet proved, Mr. Reston often said, that "if you don't demand credit for things, you can push them through."Mr. Reston thought of himself primarily as a reporter, and he often beat his  competitors to be the first to write about major news events. His coverage of the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in Washington in 1944, which laid the groundwork for the United Nations, was one of the era's most important exclusives and won him his first Pulitzer, in 1945. Those articles disclosed the substance of secret documents that were then being circulated among delegations from the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and China on the structure of the proposed international organization.Mr. Reston won his second Pulitzer in 1957 for distinguished reporting from Washington. The articles cited were written in June 1956 and analyzed the effects of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's illness on the functioning of the executive branch.He was also responsible for The Times's publication in 1955 of the documents  of the 1945 Yalta Conference. And in 1954 he disclosed that J. Robert Oppenheimer, who had directed the making of the first atomic bomb, had subsequently been denied access to secret documents by the Atomic Energy Commission because of suspicion that he was passing information to the Soviet Union, a charge of which Oppenheimer was later cleared.One exclusive dispatch came by accident. In 1971, as one of the first American reporters allowed into China, Mr. Reston developed appendicitis. His report, filed from his bed in the Anti-Imperialist Hospital in the capital, ran  on the front page under the headline "Now, About My Operation in Peking."'My Own Opinions Aren't That Good'From the 1950's on, Mr. Reston interviewed most of the world's leaders, often producing major news accounts that were scrutinized at the State Department for  their every nuance. The interviews often bore the special Reston stamp: He sought to reveal not only the policies and the politics of the people he interviewed, but also their vision of life and their view of history.Mr. Reston, who was called Scotty by virtually everyone who knew him, was 5 feet 8 inches tall and had a round and ruddy face, gray-green eyes, an ever-present pipe and an invariably pleasant manner. He was courteous not only to high-level officials but also to the young people who worked for him.Advertisement"He believes in hard work, in thrift, honor your parents, woman's place is in the home, play by the rules and live clean," his colleague Russell Baker once said.Mr. Reston was credited by competitors with having more high-level news sources in Washington than almost any other reporter, although some critics felt that he was too kind in print to some of them. The economist John Kenneth Galbraith, reviewing Mr. Reston's "The Artillery of the Press," a 1967 collection of his talks before the Council on Foreign Relations, suggested that  Mr. Reston had learned to his disadvantage "to treat all people in the manner of a newspaperman who must one day go back and see them again."But in a 1980 article in The New Republic, Mr. Reston was quoted as saying: "If you spend your life as a hatchet man -- and there's something to be said for that -- then eventually you find that everybody's out to lunch when you call. You're left with only your own opinion. I wouldn't like that because my own opinions aren't that good."Writing his column three times a week, Mr. Reston was a procrastinator, often filing right on deadline, to the dismay of night editors at The Times. A two-finger typist, he regularly wore out typewriters because he banged so hard on the keys, and his desk was a litter of papers, many of which bore tiny black  marks where a stream of smoldering matches had landed in the course of a never-ending pipe-lighting ritual.His columns, laced with quotations from Walter Lippmann, H. G. Wells, Matthew Arnold and Churchill, were a combination of high moral tone, detailed reporting, allusions to sports, impish humor and evocative descriptions of seasonal changes along the Potomac. They seldom offered absolute judgments about people or events; he used the word "maybe" more than most pundits.His first column, on Oct. 18, 1953, established the Reston style."This town is still full of echoes from the days of America's isolation," he  wrote of Washington. "It has changed in policy and personnel, more than any other world capital in the last generation. No nation has taken on so much or moved so far in such a hurry. Yet the habits of the past, like the bent figures  of homeless former senators, still haunt the capital."Press and Politics: 'Like Cats and Dogs'He often returned to certain themes, such as the role of the press. In his column of Oct. 30, 1968, when Spiro T. Agnew, soon to be elected Vice President, was denouncing news organizations, Mr. Reston wrote:"The candidates and the press are fussing at each other again, and this is the way it should be. They have different jobs, and in many ways they are natural enemies, like cats and dogs. The first job of the candidate is to win, and he usually says what he thinks will help him win. The job of the reporter is to report what happens and decontaminate as much of the political poison as he can. The conflict is obvious."In addition to his two Pulitzer Prizes, Mr. Reston was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1986 and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Award in 1991.  He received the Overseas Press Club award for interpretation of international news three times, the George Polk Memorial Award for national reporting and the French Legion of Honor, and was named Commander,  Order of the British Empire. He also received 28 honorary degrees.AdvertisementAfter retiring, he fulfilled a longtime promise to his wife, Sally, by writing his memoirs. Titled "Deadline," they were published by Random House in 1991.Reviewing the book for The New York Times, Ronald Steel, author of "Walter Lippmann and the American Century," called Mr. Reston "the quintessential Washington insider.""Officials used him to test out new ideas on the public or to drop leaks for  which they did not want to be held accountable," Mr. Steel wrote. "Because of his high position at The Times and his personal integrity, he was trusted both by those who provided the news and by those who read it."But what he did so well and so usefully for so long could not be done today. Journalism and the political world have changed too much."Born in Scotland To Years of PovertyJames Barrett Reston began life about as far from the Washington power center as one could get.He was born in Clydebank, Scotland, on Nov. 3, 1909, the son of James, a machinist, and Johanna Irving Reston. The Restons migrated to the United States  when he was an infant, but Mrs. Reston became ill, and the family returned to Scotland.There followed years of harsh poverty, of life in a brick tenement where young James and his sister slept crosswise at the foot of their parents' bed. In 1920 the family returned to the United States and settled in Dayton, Ohio. His father worked for the Delco Remy Division of General Motors.When his parents were naturalized, young James automatically became an American citizen. In 1932, he graduated from the University of Illinois with an  undistinguished academic record. He had majored in journalism, skipping the course in governmental reporting but getting an A in sportswriting.AdvertisementDuring his high school years he caddied at the Dayton Country Club golf course. His own game became so good that he twice won the Ohio state public links championship and at Illinois was captain of the Big Ten championship golf  team in 1932. His father wanted him to become a golf pro. His mother wanted him  to be a preacher, which, he was to say later, is really what he became.In the winters during his school days, he hung around The Dayton Daily News.  "When the phone rang, I'd pick it up and take down the scores," he later recalled. "And from that I just moved into newspapering. I never thought of anything else."From the Cincinnati Reds To the London BlitzAnother link to the world of newspapers was Gov. James M. Cox, the Ohio publisher and 1920 Democratic Presidential candidate, for whom young Reston had  caddied. Mr. Cox gave him his first job after college on one of the Cox newspapers in Ohio, The Springfield Daily News, where he earned $10 a week as the sports editor.Later he was hired as traveling secretary and publicity director for the Cincinnati Reds baseball team. In 1934 he moved to New York as a sportswriter for the Associated Press Feature Service.The next year he married Sally Jane Fulton, a former college classmate who had been president of her sorority, an A student and a Phi Beta Kappa in her junior year. Named Sara but always called Sally, she was the daughter of a judge from Sycamore, Ill., a small town near Chicago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Reston once told a University of Illinois graduating class, "I should say in passing that I myself married a recklessly beautiful girl whom I first saw on Wright Street wearing a scarlet coat.""My Gal Sal," as he called her in the dedication of "Sketches in the Sand," a collection of his columns published in 1967, became his closest confidante, frequent collaborator and steadiest supporter.They had three sons, Richard, James Jr. and Thomas. Mr. Reston's own happy situation made him a champion of marriage, and he was forever asking his young bachelor colleagues when they were going to wed.In 1937 The Associated Press sent Mr. Reston to London on a rather loose dual assignment: in summer covering sports events, in winter the British Foreign Office.AdvertisementIn 1939 he joined The Times and became low man on the totem pole in the London bureau, with a salary of $85 a week. He was so little known on the foreign desk in New York that his first byline in The Times had his name wrong -- John instead of James.Then came the London blitz. The Times's office for much of the war was on the seventh floor of the Reuters Building on Fleet Street, which offered a view of the dome of St. Paul's Cathedral. He described this view of the battle in his first book, "Prelude to Victory.""Before we got better sense, we used to put the lights off in the Times office every night and watch this effort," he wrote. "With uncanny regularity, the German bombers would come over just about 10 minutes after blackout and start dropping incendiary bombs all over this section. About an hour before we could see the flames, we would begin to hear the steady throb of scores of engines along the banks of the Thames; these were the pumps, driving the muddy water from the river up through miles of new hose. . . ."A little later the sky would begin to change in color from midnight blue to  a reddish glow, and soon the great dome of the cathedral would stand out in silhouette against the flames of perhaps a dozen raging fires. Night after night we watched this incredible scene, and morning after morning we marveled at the fact that the fires were somehow put out."In December 1940 he was reassigned to Washington, and in 1942 published "Prelude to Victory," a call to action to the American people that was acclaimed here and abroad. Its theme was pure Reston: Unless Americans put aside personal  aims and materialistic thinking and made sacrifices in a crusade for their country, the war would not be won.In late 1942, Elmer Davis, head of the Office of War Information, obtained a  leave of absence from The Times for Mr. Reston and sent him to London to set up  the agency's effort there.John G. Winant, the United States Ambassador to Britain, recommended him to Arthur Hays Sulzberger, then president and publisher of The Times, who was looking for an assistant. It was the beginning of Mr. Reston's close friendship  with the Sulzberger family.After the War Years, Washington for GoodMr. Reston returned to Washington and was named national correspondent in 1945. He made his mark with his coverage of Dumbarton Oaks, which illustrated a  Reston maxim: Seek out the disgruntled party. His theory was that people who were disenchanted were more likely to talk candidly.AdvertisementIn this case, it was the Chinese representatives to the conference who were disenchanted. In his memoirs, Mr. Reston told of having met Chen Yi, one of the  Chinese delegates, some years before the war through Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger, wife of The Times's publisher. At Mr. Reston's urging, Chen Yi slipped him the complete texts of the proposals.Instead of writing one long article, Mr. Reston doled out the information, producing an exclusive a day. The Russians thought Washington had leaked the material; Washington suspected the British, and the F.B.I. started an investigation of Mr. Reston.In 1948 Mr. Reston became diplomatic correspondent for The Times, and in 1953 he became Washington bureau chief, succeeding Arthur Krock.Mr. Reston continued as bureau chief until 1964, when he voluntarily relinquished the post to concentrate on his column.In 1968 he was summoned to New York by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, who had become publisher, to succeed Turner Catledge as executive editor, in charge of the entire news operation. The internal politics of the news department had received publicity after an unsuccessful effort by editors in New York to exert more control over the Washington bureau. Mr. Reston's mandate was to re-establish peace.For 13 months he ran the news department while commuting to Washington a few  times a week to write his column. It was an almost impossible job. In 1969, knowing that his column was suffering and that he had to choose between it and the editor's post, he gladly chose the column.Mr. Reston was eminently a Washington man. He loved and understood the capital. Moreover, he had helped shape the Washington bureau. These were his people, and many of them regarded him as a father figure. The New York office, on the other hand, seemed a vast, impersonal beehive, and Mr. Reston never felt  totally comfortable there.During these years the Restons lived in a pleasant red brick house on Woodley Road in leafy northwest Washington and spent weekends at their log cabin in Fiery Run, Va. Mr. Reston often used Fiery Run as the dateline on his Thoreau-like columns about the restorative life in the country.AdvertisementIn 1968 the Restons purchased The Vineyard Gazette, a 122-year-old weekly on  Martha's Vineyard, Mass., where they vacationed in the summer. The paper has remained in the family; their son Richard is editor and publisher, and his wife, Mary Jo, is publisher and general manager.Two Cuba Episodes And the Pentagon PapersMr. Reston played a part in the publication of the Pentagon Papers in 1971 and in two other major news events involving The Times in questions of national  security. The others were the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.In the spring of 1961, The Times was preparing to publish an article by Tad Szulc reporting that 5,000 or 6,000 Cuban exiles who had been training in the United States and in Central America for nine months were about to launch an invasion of Cuba to overthrow the regime of Fidel Castro.The article was planned for page 1 on April 7, under a four-column headline.  But Orvil Dryfoos, then the publisher, was troubled by the security implications of the report. On April 6, he and Mr. Catledge, then managing editor, telephoned Mr. Reston, who advised them not to publish the article and cautioned against giving away the proposed timing of the landing as "imminent."The article was published on April 7 under a one-column headline and with no  mention of the invasion's date. The Bay of Pigs invasion took place 10 days later and ended in debacle. President John F. Kennedy, who took full responsibility, said that if The Times had published more about the operation, it might have saved the Administration from making such a colossal mistake."If I had it to do over, I would do exactly what we did at the time," Mr. Reston said later. "It is ridiculous to think that publishing the fact that the  invasion was imminent would have avoided this disaster."In 1962 Mr. Reston was apparently the only reporter who had found out that the Soviet Union, then under the leadership of Nikita S. Khrushchev, had secreted nuclear missiles in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida. When Kennedy realized that Mr. Reston had the information, he telephoned him directly.Four years later, Mr. Reston recounted the incident to E. Clifton Daniel, then managing editor of The Times.Advertisement"The President told me that he was going on television on Monday evening to report to the American people," Mr. Reston recalled. "He said that if we published the news about the missiles, Khrushchev could actually give him an ultimatum before he went on the air."I told the President I would report to my office in New York," Mr. Reston continued. "And if my advice was asked, I would recommend that we not publish. It was not my duty to decide."Kennedy then called Mr. Dryfoos, the publisher, and asked him not to print Mr. Reston's article. Mr. Dryfoos left the matter up to Mr. Reston and his staff, and the article was withheld.It was a different story, however, in 1971 when The Times obtained and published what became known as the Pentagon Papers, the Government's top-secret  documents on the Vietnam War. Seeing this at once as "the story of the century," Mr. Reston was one of the editors who felt that the documents should be published because they were history and that therefore no question of national security was involved.One of Mr. Reston's contributions to journalism was the corps of young reporters he discovered and developed.In 1961 he instituted a program of internships for young would-be reporters,  modeled on the clerkships at the United States Supreme Court and suggested to him by the late Justice Felix Frankfurter. Each year he would recruit a new college graduate as his clerk and researcher. He paid a price for this program,  as time and again the young clerks with lofty journalistic thoughts would mix up his airline reservations or keep the Secretary of State waiting because they had failed to cancel a scheduled appointment.Linda Greenhouse, who went on to report on the Supreme Court for The Times, recalled that on her first day as a clerk, Mr. Reston asked her to get Ted Sorensen on the phone and suggested she try Paul Weiss in New York. After unsuccessfully calling every Weiss-comma-Paul in the Manhattan phone book, she reported back to Mr. Reston."He didn't groan, tear his hair or -- more important, and the reason for my undying gratitude -- laugh at me," Ms. Greenhouse said. "He gently explained that Paul, Weiss was a New York law firm where Ted Sorensen was working, looked  up the number and gave it to me."AdvertisementIt was perhaps this quality, this unfailing kindliness, that constituted his  special attractiveness. It enabled him to view the faults and frailties of the world with compassion and to carry on in the belief that the best in mankind would eventually win out over the worst."Stick with the optimists, Niftie," he wrote in a column in February 1980, welcoming his new grandson, Devin Fitzgerald Reston, to the human race. "It's going to be tough enough even if they're right."Mr. Reston is survived by his wife; his sons, Richard F. Reston of Martha's Vineyard, James B. Reston Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., and Thomas B. Reston of Washington; his sister, Joanna Richey of Santa Cruz, Calif., and five grandchildren.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this obituary; biography appears in print on December 7, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: James Reston, a Giant of Journalism, Dies at 86. 
The Boeing Company's largest group of union workers went on strike yesterday  after voting down a new three-year contract offer, with 78 percent opposed and only 22 percent in favor.Union officials said they objected to Boeing's increasing use of subcontractors in other countries, to reduced health care benefits and to the size of pension contributions.The strike involves 32,500 members of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, representing about 31 percent of Boeing's work force. The striking machinists are based primarily in the Seattle area, but some work in factories in Wichita, Kan., and Gresham, Ore., near Portland. The machinists union, which includes assembly-line workers, last struck Boeing in 1989, for 48 days.Paul Binder, a spokesman for Boeing, the world's largest maker of commercial  jet aircraft, said the company would continue to manufacture aircraft and defense products during the strike, and noted that 23 planes were produced in the 1989 strike.AdvertisementBut that was a fraction of its normal output. Boeing has not used replacement workers in previous strikes, and has no plans to use them now, company officials said.Boeing's shares, which have drifted down about 10 percent in the past week in anticipation of the strike, closed today at $65.375, up 75 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.Analysts said that while a protracted strike would squeeze earnings in the fourth quarter, the main effect would be to postpone a few deliveries. Because the current delivery schedule is still slow, the company can weather a brief strike with little damage, they said.Wolfgang Demisch, an analyst with BT Securities in New York, said that with worldwide demand for aircraft rebounding from a five-year slump, and with Boeing's manufacturing efficiency improved, the company is fundamentally healthy.And, since most airlines are still not in a hurry to take delivery of planes  at this time, Mr. Demisch said, a short strike will have only marginal effect.But analysts said the strike could become long and bitter if it hinges on the issue of foreign subcontractors. Union officials say most components can be made better and cheaper domestically, and that this will preserve jobs. Boeing says some use of foreign subcontractors is necessary, if only to win sales in an increasingly global marketplace.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."Job security is the No. 1 issue and has been since Day 1," said Matt Bates,  a spokesman for the union. "A lot of jobs have been going to Mexico, China, Japan, and it's an accelerating flow of business overseas."Mr. Bates said the union had a strike fund of $125 million, and was prepared  to stay on strike as long as necessary to achieve its goals.He maintained that union members were chagrined at a change in health care benefits that would require higher co-payments from workers, and at an employer  pension fund contribution that fell short of the amount paid by McDonnell-Douglas, Boeing's smaller rival.AdvertisementMr. Bates said the net effect would be a $1,000 annual loss in income to union workers, even after the lump-sum payments and wage increases included in the company's latest offer were factored in.Boeing's latest contract offer, presented on Monday, provides for lump-sum pay increases of 5 percent in the first year of the contract, 3 percent in the second and a 3 percent general wage increase in the third year. The average union member's wages would increase to $22.16 a hour from the current $20.37. But the plan also calls for health insurance deductibles to double -- to $150 a  year for a single person and $450 for a family.Analysts said that Boeing had made great strides in reducing its costs in recent years, but that the pressure from airlines to provide planes at lower prices would continue to grow. Boeing has weathered a protracted slump in aircraft demand, in part by cutting its work force to 105,000 from a peak of about 166,000 in 1989.With a recovering demand for aircraft, analysts said, Boeing is not likely to make major concessions in its contract negotiations.William B. Whitlow, an analyst with Pacific Crest Securities in Seattle, said Boeing's customers and shareholders would probably be sympathetic to the company's taking a tough stand in an effort "to be the low-cost provider of aircraft."He also said he did not think Boeing would negotiate on the issue of subcontractors because that issue "is being dictated by the marketplace."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 1995, on Page 1001008 of the National edition with the headline: Union Rejects Boeing Offer; Goes on Strike In Three States. 
IN THE FINAL, FRENZIED days before he completed the editing for his sprawling new film, "Nixon," Oliver Stone seemed oddly calm. He sat slumped in an office at an editing studio near Santa Monica, exhausted and, yes, frightened. Mr. Stone, 49, remains scarred by the criticism of historians and journalists that he twisted facts in his 1991 film "J.F.K." when he dived into the murky waters of American history and created a Government conspiracy in the assassination of  John F. Kennedy.Now comes "Nixon," starring Anthony Hopkins, about the life of the nation's 37th President until his resignation in 1974, two years after the Watergate break-in.I don't know what to expect," the director said slowly. "But I think some Nixon haters will surely say, 'He goes too easy on him.' "In sweeping fashion, at three hours plus, the film provides what Mr. Stone is careful to call a "dramatic interpretation" of everything from Nixon's emotionally and financially distressed early life in Southern California -- including the deaths from tuberculosis of two of his four brothers -- to his participation in many of the major events of the second half of the 20th century: the cold war, the rise and fall of Joseph McCarthy, the Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Vietnam War and the fateful break-in at the Democratic National Committee offices in Washington.AdvertisementIn addition to Mr. Hopkins, the cast of the film -- which weaves realistic scenes of public and private life with almost surrealistic visual devices -- includes Joan Allen as Pat Nixon, James Woods as H. R. Haldeman, J. T. Walsh as  John Erlichman, Paul Sorvino as Henry A. Kissinger and David Hyde Pierce as John Dean."Nixon's a giant of a figure in the classical tradition," Mr. Stone said. "A  poor boy, humble origins, who rises to the top and crashes down in a heap of hubris." He paused. "Let's face it, he's a great dramatic character, a fascinating blend of idealism and sleaziness."The film maker said that his own view of Nixon had shifted greatly over the years. As a teen-ager in New York City, he was a fervent Nixon supporter, largely because of the influence of his father, Louis, a Wall Street broker and  a Republican. As an infantryman in Vietnam, he said, he continued to believe in  Nixon, largely because of Nixon's vow to end the war. But by 1972, with the war  still going on, he was thoroughly disillusioned with the President."I was relieved when he left office," Mr. Stonesaid. "I had enough of Watergate and his cover-ups. I didn't see him as a tragic figure then because he was too close. I didn't see the drama of it until later."With "Nixon," which is being released by Hollywood Pictures (a division of Walt Disney) on Wednesday, Mr. Stone has not only refused to demonize Nixon but  has tried to create nothing less than a classic tragedy or perhaps his version of "Citizen Kane." (No one has ever accused Oliver Stone of humility.) In discussing "Nixon" he refers often to Shakespeare, as well as to Orson Welles's  great film. On a personal level, the film is also Mr. Stone's attempt to show Hollywood that he is not an ideological bad boy with a flair for what many critics have termed weird politics, as in "J.F.K.," or for diatribes about Americans, as in his last two movies, "Heaven and Earth" and "Natural Born Killers," both of which were critical misfires."What surprised me when I began researching the film was the suffering he had gone through in his early life, the sense of isolation and loneliness that stayed with him," said Mr. Stone, who, in addition to creating the movie, has seen to the publication of a book that includes an annotated version of the script with references to more than 80 historical works. "In the end I felt pity, admiration, depression, disgust."The line in Hollywood is that Mr. Stone actually identified with Nixon. After all, the director has shown a preoccupation with conspiracies and enemies that seems Nixonesque. And Mr. Stone takes this proposition seriously. "I think I do very much identify with him," he said. "I have some of the same human qualities, the combination of optimism, pessimism, self-destructiveness. I mean, we're human. I cover up, too. It's hard to be straight all the time, hard to be  honest and have integrity. That's not to say that I've committed crimes."(Even "Stone," a friendly new biography of the director written by James Riordan, depicts a sometimes out-of-control man with a taste for drugs and a variety of women.)AdvertisementStung by the charges that he distorted history in "J.F.K." and wanting to avoid that sort of charge with "Nixon," Mr. Stone hired three former Nixon aides to serve as advisers on the film: Alexander Butterfield, a former secretary to the Cabinet and special assistant to Nixon, who first revealed the existence of  the President's secret tapes of his Oval Office conversations; John Dean, Nixon's White House counsel, who is now an investment banker in Los Angeles, and John Sears, a former deputy White House counsel and political adviser."Nothing in the film strikes me as unreasonable or unfair," said Mr. Dean, who made his Watergate-era papers available to Mr. Stone, Stephen J. Rivele and  Christopher Wilkinson, who share the screenwriting credit. "In the larger picture, it reflected accurately what happened."The primary task for Mr. Dean and the other advisers was not to validate the  film maker's themes but to provide basic information: who stood where, who attended certain meetings, who wore what. "I appreciate there has to be dramatic license," Mr. Dean said. He noted, for example, that there were actually two Watergate break-ins but that the film shows only one. Also, he added, the film includes a nighttime meeting between Mr. Dean and Howard Hunt on a Washington bridge that never took place.Mr. Butterfield, who worked side by side with Mr. Nixon from 1969 to 1973, said he examined the script and was on the set constantly to tell Mr. Stone what he thought was and was not accurate."Oliver was very concerned about accuracy, but at times he told me he had to  take dramatic license," Mr. Butterfield said. "In one scene, we have Nixon walking around the Oval Office. I told him Nixon never got up from the desk. Oliver said if Nixon didn't walk around, we'd all go to sleep."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Stone said he expects Nixon's daughters, Tricia Nixon Cox and Julie Nixon Eisenhower, to object to his portraying their parents' marriage as troubled, their mother as desperately unhappy and their father as a heavy drinker.Certainly one element of "Nixon" that will be disputed is its image of Nixon  as an abuser of alcohol. Mr. Stone said that this portrayal was based on books by authors of various political stripes -- among them Stephen E. Ambrose, Fawn Brodie, Tom Wicker and Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward -- as well as on interviews with Mr. Butterfield and other former Nixon aides.Asked about Nixon's drinking, Mr. Butterfield said, "I never saw him coming apart at the seams."Mr. Wicker said that for his 1991 book, "One of Us: Richard Nixon and the American Dream," he was able to document only one case of Nixon drinking excessively, on a visit to the United States Embassy in Warsaw as Vice President. "He got himself drunk," Mr. Wicker said. "It was the only story I could authenticate. He probably was a heavy drinker at the end, but it's something I couldn't authenticate."Beyond this, Mr. Stone has also tentatively stepped back into "J.F.K." territory with references to an alleged plot to assassinate Fidel Castro. The film -- as well as an essay in Mr. Stone's book on the film -- contends that the plot was organized by the Central Intelligence Agency toward the end of the Eisenhower Administration and that Mr. Nixon, as Vice President, was involved in its planning. The film intimates that Nixon was subsequently guilt-ridden because he believed that Cubans involved in the plot were later involved in the  assassination of President John F. Kennedy.AdvertisementAsked about this aspect of the film, Mr. Wicker said, "It doesn't jibe with anything I knew about."The idea for "Nixon" was first presented to Mr. Stone several years ago (before Nixon died in 1994) in a three-page proposal by Mr. Rivele, an author and a playwright, and Mr. Wilkinson, a documentary film maker. "From the very beginning, Oliver saw Nixon as a character of Shakespearean proportions," Mr. Rivele said. "It was not going to be 'J.F.K. 2,' not a conspiracy film, but a movie about a great character of dramatic tragedy."As they created the movie, Mr. Stone and the two other screenwriters kept in  mind the dark images of Breughel paintings and coined a dramatic device that doesn't appear in the film explicitly but did help them shape it. They called it "the beast," and compared it to the witches and ghosts of a Shakespearean tragedy. "We sort of imagined a headless monster that lurches through postwar history," Mr. Wilkinson said.The film posits that it was dark forces beyond Nixon's control -- the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy and the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., the Vietnam War, the destruction of Lyndon B. Johnson and Hubert Humphrey, as well as the early deaths of two of Nixon's brothers -- that thrust Nixon to center stage. "It was almost as if Nixon was helped by something he was terrified of," said Mr. Wilkinson said."Both of us started this project despising Nixon," Mr. Wilkinson continued, referring to himself and Mr. Rivele. "The more we became exposed to him, the more we knew about him, our contempt was slowly eroded to the point where we more than pitied him, we empathized with him." The two sreenwriters pointed out  that in addition to his involvement with the House Un-American Activities Committee, the Vietnam War and Watergate, Nixon was also known for his diplomacy with China, reaching a strategic arms pact with the Soviet Union and starting the Environmental Protection Agency.The challenge of portraying such a conflicted leader fell to Mr. Hopkins, who was selected by Mr. Stone after Tom Hanks and Jack Nicholson turned down the part when another studio, Warner Brothers, was involved."When Oliver asked me to do it, I thought, this man is crazy," said Mr. Hopkins. "This is an American President, and I'm a limey, a Welshman. How could  I do it?"Mr. Stone said what had attracted him to Mr. Hopkins were two Nixonesque qualities, the actor's sense of being an outsider and the sense of loneliness that he had conveyed in films like "Shadowlands" and "The Remains of the Day." For his part, Mr. Hopkins was surprised by Mr. Stone. "I expected a kind of caveman," the actor said by telephone from Paris, where he was working on James  Ivory's film "Picasso." "I heard stories that he was tough and aggressive. But he was so protective of me."Despite his good relationship with the director, Mr. Hopkins said, he was almost overwhelmed by the role: "The hardest part I've ever done. Harder than Shakespeare and Marlowe. I watched films of Nixon, and I saw a man in such agony and pain with such a lack of self-knowledge. Amazing man."Advertisement"It was such a huge part, so many pages," he said. "They kept adding and changing dialogue, and I told him one day, 'Oliver I'm drowning; I'm going under.' And Oliver said: 'No, you're not. You're scared. You could rise above it. Fear is a good thing.' " Mr. Hopkins laughed. "I've never heard that one before."IN THE MIDST OF THE DEmanding dramatic requirements, Mr. Stone insisted that  historical accuracy was foremost -- up to a point. "Obviously you could say I've learned lessons, to be very careful of some of the imputations," the director said. "But if you get too careful, you sometimes lose the edge that a movie needs."Despite the controversy over "J.F.K.," Mr. Stone still believes that it is the film maker's responsibility to interpret history through his own prism. "This thing is in flux; history is not agreed upon," Mr. Stone said. "There is no official history. The C.I.A. is a secret.""The country is in many ways a secret to its own citizens," he continued. "We don't know how the Federal Reserve really works, how banks work, how credit works, how the mechanisms of power work. I'd love to make a movie about the Federal Reserve Board. Ultimately film makers should do their research, read all the books and make their call."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 1995, on Page 2002011 of the National edition with the headline: FILM;Professor Stone Resumes His Presidential Research. 
International   A2-7CLINTON TO EASE COMPUTER SALES President Clinton is preparing to relax restrictions on the export of high-performance computers, handing a victory to the technology company executives who were among his chief supporters in 1992.  A1 LIFE NEARING NORMAL IN SARAJEVO After years under seige, life in Sarajevo is slowly coming back to normal. In the boulevard known as Sniper Alley, where people once dodged bullets, the local police now issue speeding tickets.  A3 An American envoy heads to Bosnia to seek a cease-fire.  A3 NIGERIAN LIFTS DEATH SENTENCES In a bid to defuse Nigeria's tensions, Gen. Sani Abacha said that he would commute the death sentences of as many as 40 opponents of his military Government and that he would hand over power to an elected government in three years.  A6 CHINA ACCEPTS U.S. INVITATION China's Foreign Minister said that if the Clinton Administration lacked the "political will" to honor President Jiang Zemin with a formal visit in Washington, "a summit meeting in New York will do." A6The mysterious leader of a Mexican rebellion has resurfaced.  A5 U.S. students say they were duped by a college near Oxford.  A7 Savusavu Journal: A Cousteau family feud erupts in Fiji Islands.  A4National   A8-15, B9TAX CUT WIGGLING Senator Bob Dole suggested that Senate Republicans might not go along with the entire $245 billion in tax cuts that they had agreed to with their House counterparts.  A1 THE SELLING OF HEALTH CARE Tennessee's bold switch to a managed care system for health coverage produced a  frenzied battle for the market that sometimes bent the rules too far.  A1 LURE OF THE COMPUTER FRONTIER Drawn by images of personal fortunes and cultural excitement, a generation of college graduates with no technical training is streaming into the software business.  A1 A WILDERNESS STRUGGLE On remote Cumberland Island, Ga., an attempt to restore a decaying mansion has prompted fears of overdevelopment.  A8 A $55 MILLION GIFT Michael Bloomberg, who runs the media company Bloomberg LP, has donated $55 million to Johns Hopkins University.  A8 RESURGENT N.A.A.C.P. The N.A.A.C.P., trying to restore its luster, has begun a drive to register a million new black voters.  A8 AUSTERITY ON THE AIR The Senate cut nearly two-thirds of the money for Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.  A9 NUNN'S RETIREMENT DECISION Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia is being urged by colleagues in both parties to seek another term.  A10 PEROT'S CALIFORNIA DREAM Ross Perot and his effort to form a third political party were the talk of California.  A10 TIME TO DELIBERATE All eyes will be on the Simpson jury this week as deliberations begin, but there is no agreement on how the panel will rule.  B9 Poll shows shows public is racially split over possible verdict.  B9 ACCORD SEEMS NEAR ON IMPLANTS Negotiators for producers of silicone breast implants and for thousands of women who say the devices have caused illness tried to inch toward an agreement.  A13Metro Digest   B1 SHEIK AND FOLLOWERS CONVICTED Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the blind Muslim cleric who brought the fiery passions  of his fundamentalist cause to America from his native Egypt, was convicted of leading a "war of urban terrorism against the United States." A1 DEFIANT TO THE END Speaking by telephone in his cell to his followers in a Brooklyn mosque, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman said that all great religious believers had been tortured or imprisoned for their beliefs.A1 THE SCHOOL WARS GO ON Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Board of Education battled anew over how to proceed with the search for a chancellor of New York City's public schools, after a staggering 36 hours that saw one candidate withdraw and then another get the job, only to have it snatched away.  A1 Arts/Entertainment C11-16 How the Met reinvented the supertitle.  C11 Theater: Carol Burnett in "Moon Over Buffalo." C11 Film: "Sixteen Oh Sixty." C12 "The Neon Bible." C14 Books: "Manhattan, When I Was Young." C15 Television: "Saturday Night Live" season premiere.  C11 "The People's Plague: Tuberculosis in America." C16 Obituaries B12 David B. H. Martin, lawyer and government official. Arthur Benfield, British detective who led child murder case. Business Digest D1 Sports C1-10 Baseball: Yankees reach post-season for first time in 14 years.  C1 Mets finish with a victory and tied for second place.  C9 Angels force playoff with Seattle.  C9 Columns: Anderson on Al Davis.  C4 Vecsey on Yankees.  C7 Football: Giants lose to 49ers.  C1 Jets crushed by Raiders.  C4 Redskins upset Cowboys.  C2 Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17 Editorials High court anxiety. Medicare compromise possible. The Eastern European press. Letters Anthony Lewis: A menacing vendetta. Bob Herbert: Giuliani's chancellor. William Safire: Tale of two treaties. Bill McKibben: Still "forever wild"? Dov S. Zakheim: Adding up the taxpayers' tab for Bosnia. Bridge C14 Chronicle B2 Crossword C12We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 1995, on Page A00002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
International A2-7 CLINTON TO EASE COMPUTER SALES  President Clinton is preparing to relax restrictions on the export of high-performance computers, handing a victory to the technology company executives who were among his chief supporters in 1992.  A1  LIFE NEARING NORMAL IN SARAJEVO  After years under seige, life in Sarajevo is slowly coming back to normal. In the boulevard known as Sniper Alley, where people once dodged bullets, the local police now issue speeding tickets.  A3  An American envoy heads to Bosnia to seek a cease-fire.  A3  NIGERIAN LIFTS DEATH SENTENCES  In a bid to defuse Nigeria's tensions, Gen. Sani Abacha said that he would commute the death sentences of as many as 40 opponents of his military Government and that he would hand over power to an elected government in three years.  A6  CHINA ACCEPTS U.S. INVITATION  China's Foreign Minister said that if the Clinton Administration lacked the "political will" to honor President Jiang Zemin with a formal visit in Washington, "a summit meeting in New York will do." A6  The mysterious leader of a Mexican rebellion has resurfaced.  A5  U.S. students say they were duped by a college near Oxford.  A7  Savusavu Journal: A Cousteau family feud erupts in Fiji Islands.  A4 National A8-15, B9 TAX CUT WIGGLING  Senator Bob Dole suggested that Senate Republicans might not go along with the entire $245 billion in tax cuts that they had agreed to with their House counterparts.  A1  THE SELLING OF HEALTH CARE  Tennessee's bold switch to a managed care system for health coverage produced a frenzied battle for the market that sometimes bent the rules too far.  A1  LURE OF THE COMPUTER FRONTIER  Drawn by images of personal fortunes and cultural excitement, a generation of college graduates with no technical training is streaming into the software business.  A1  A WILDERNESS STRUGGLE  On remote Cumberland Island, Ga., an attempt to restore a decaying mansion has prompted fears of overdevelopment.  A8  A $55 MILLION GIFT  Michael Bloomberg, who runs the media company Bloomberg LP, has donated $55 million to Johns Hopkins University.  A8  RESURGENT N.A.A.C.P.  The N.A.A.C.P., trying to restore its luster, has begun a drive to register a million new black voters.  A8  AUSTERITY ON THE AIR  The Senate cut nearly two-thirds of the money for Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.  A9  NUNN'S RETIREMENT DECISION  Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia is being urged by colleagues in both parties to seek another term.  A10  PEROT'S CALIFORNIA DREAM  Ross Perot and his effort to form a third political party were the talk of California.  A10  TIME TO DELIBERATE  All eyes will be on the Simpson jury this week as deliberations begin, but there is no agreement on how the panel will rule.  B9  Poll shows shows public is racially split over possible verdict.  B9  ACCORD SEEMS NEAR ON IMPLANTS  Negotiators for producers of silicone breast implants and for thousands of women who say the devices have caused illness tried to inch toward an agreement.  A13 Metro Digest B1 SHEIK AND FOLLOWERS CONVICTED  Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the blind Muslim cleric who brought the fiery passions of his fundamentalist cause to America from his native Egypt, was convicted of leading a "war of urban terrorism against the United States." A1  DEFIANT TO THE END  Speaking by telephone in his cell to his followers in a Brooklyn mosque, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman said that all great religious believers had been tortured or imprisoned for their beliefs.A1  THE SCHOOL WARS GO ON  Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Board of Education battled anew over how to proceed with the search for a chancellor of New York City's public schools, after a staggering 36 hours that saw one candidate withdraw and then another get the job, only to have it snatched away.  A1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  How the Met reinvented the supertitle.  C11  Theater: Carol Burnett in "Moon Over Buffalo." C11  Film: "Sixteen Oh Sixty." C12  "The Neon Bible." C14  Books: "Manhattan, When I Was Young." C15  Television: "Saturday Night Live" season premiere.  C11  "The People's Plague: Tuberculosis in America." C16  Obituaries B12  David B. H. Martin, lawyer and government official.   Arthur Benfield, British detective who led child murder case. Business Digest D1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Yankees reach post-season for first time in 14 years.  C1  Mets finish with a victory and tied for second place.  C9  Angels force playoff with Seattle.  C9  Columns: Anderson on Al Davis.  C4  Vecsey on Yankees.  C7  Football: Giants lose to 49ers.  C1  Jets crushed by Raiders.  C4  Redskins upset Cowboys.  C2  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  High court anxiety.  Medicare compromise possible.  The Eastern European press.  Letters Anthony Lewis: A menacing vendetta.  Bob Herbert: Giuliani's chancellor.  William Safire: Tale of two treaties.  Bill McKibben: Still "forever wild"?  Dov S. Zakheim: Adding up the taxpayers' tab for Bosnia. Bridge C14 Chronicle B2 Crossword C12We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 1995, on Page A00002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
CORONA. Everything about it was beyond top secret -- its name and history, builders and operators, cameras and orbits, photographs and interpreters and, most important of all, what it snooped on from space. As the world's first system of spy satellites, Corona was a cold war coup of extraordinary dimensions and it was officially and assiduously treated for decades as if it did not exist.Until now. The veil slipped in February when President Clinton declassified thousands of Corona's early photographs and documents. It later fell further when reconnaissance pioneers spoke freely for the first time of their top-secret troubles and triumphs, revealing a series of surprises about the most highly classified of the nation's space programs.The 95 Corona satellites that successfully conducted espionage from 1960 to 1972 turn out to have been remarkably advanced tools whose development, far from the work of an inner circle, drew on the nation's top scientific and industrial talent. More important, the new disclosures show just how greatly the craft revolutionized Washington's ability to understand its cold war friends and enemies."It was as if an enormous floodlight had been turned on in a darkened warehouse," Albert D. Wheelon, one of its architects, told a Central Intelligence Agency symposium in May. "The Corona data quickly assumed the decisive role that the Enigma intercepts had played in World War II."AdvertisementA 360-page book of formerly secret Corona papers, published recently by the C.I.A., shows that the spy system in the early 1960's dispelled fears that the United States had fallen far behind the Soviet Union in the building of long-range missiles. It also revealed in 1963 that Moscow was building antimissile arms, disclosed in 1964 that China was about to detonate its first atom bomb, and discovered in 1967 that Israel had destroyed at least 245 aircraft in Egypt, Jordan and Syria during the Six-Day War.James W. Plumber, Corona's industrial manager, said the wave of innovations behind the system not only illuminated a multitude of foreign enigmas but also directly aided such open national efforts as the Apollo program to put men on the Moon and the creation of space telescopes for observing the heavens. "Whatever we did had not been done before," Mr. Plumber said in an interview. "It was all pioneering."Other recent disclosures about Corona included these:*A dozen missions failed before one in August 1960 succeeded in shipping exposed film back from outer space. A dozen more failures occurred through 1961. One gold-plated film pod speeding back from space landed in a Russian forest, where woodsmen chopped it up with axes.*The first successful mission in 1960 covered more than 1.6 million square miles of Soviet territory -- far more that the earlier U-2 spy planes had obtained in all their 24 flights over four years. Eventually Corona photographed more than 750 million square miles of Earth's surface, many times its overall area.*Corona spied not only on foreign targets but also took extensive photographs of the United States. Eventually such photos became the documentary basis for many Government maps, including those of the Defense Mapping Agency and the United States Geological Survey.*The name Corona, far from referring to a bright light or astrophysical phenomenon, like the outer part of the Sun's atmosphere, arose in the early days of the program when an official took inspiration in from his typewriter, a Smith-Corona.The main forum for the pioneers' disclosures was a two-day symposium in May that was co-sponsored by the C.I.A.'s Center for the Study of Intelligence and George Washington University. After more than 35 years of intense secrecy, it was the first time that many of the innovators were able to speak candidly with one another about the reconnaissance work and see the spy photographs themselves."I had guys crying who had worked on the product but never seen the imagery," said Carole S. Minor, a C.I.A. coordinator of the symposium.AdvertisementCorona was born at a time of extreme apprehension in the West. Moscow exploded a hydrogen bomb in 1953 and launched a long-range missile in 1957, and soon afterward claimed it had joined the two technologies together in a deadly new expression of Communist might. The West, relatively backward in rocketry, was apprehensive.The lack of data, recalled Lawrence Houston, the C.I.A.'s general counsel at the time, "was just appalling.""We just didn't have it -- any real information," he said. "We just didn't know what was going on."The United States began U-2 flights over the Soviet Union in 1956, but their reconnaissance results were limited and the flights were quite risky. The planes were considered less of an intelligence asset than a political liability. Something better was needed and fast.In February 1958, President Dwight D. Eisenhower authorized work on Corona, an imaging satellite system meant to take pictures of Earth from space. Periodically, a Corona satellite was to expel a pod of exposed film, which would speed back to Earth and when parachuting downward would be plucked from the sky by an airplane.The decision to go ahead with Corona came just days after the United States orbited its first satellite, Explorer 1, which flew into space from Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Jan. 31, 1958, and discovered the Van Allen radiation belt.From the start, the spy system's architects were top national scientists, including Dr. James R. Killian Jr., President Eisenhower's science adviser, Dr. James G. Baker, a Harvard astronomer, and Dr. Edwin H. Land of the Polaroid Corporation, who headed a panel of C.I.A. consultants that probed the potential of space reconnaissance.The top-secret project was carried out by an industry team at the forefront of aerospace research. Lockheed Missiles and Space built the spacecraft. Itek and Fairchild made the cameras. Eastman Kodak made the film. General Electric made the film-return pods. And Douglas Aircraft made the rockets.An elaborate ruse was put in pace in late 1958 as the Government announced the beginning of a series of missions meant to analyze the hostile climates of space. But what actually began thundering aloft from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California in 1959 were Corona spy satellites. A big security worry was the nearby Southern Pacific Railroad.Advertisement"Throughout its existence, the Corona program at Vandenberg was plagued by having to time the launches to occur during one of the intervals between passing trains," says a recently declassified C.I.A. history.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Failures were legion. One rocket exploded on the launching pad. Three failed to get into space. Two satellites went into unusable orbits. One film pod ejected prematurely. Three cameras failed.Analyzing the problems, expert panels called for more preflight testing. And contractors went on a reconstruction frenzy. Faced with spy film that repeatedly tore and broke in space, Kodak invented a new type that replaced the acetate base with a polyester one. Its Estar film, in addition to space espionage, eventually found many commercial uses.The first big success came in August 1960 on the 14th mission. More than a half mile of Kodak film weighing 20 pounds was recovered by an Air Force C-119 Flying Boxcar.  Among the captured images was a Soviet bomber base at Mys Shmidta, on the extreme northern coast of the Russian Far East. The base was only 400 miles from Nome, Alaska, and was of intense interest to American military planners.The intelligence gap filled quickly. In September 1961, after five successful Corona missions, the C.I.A.  cut sharply its estimate of Moscow's long-range missiles, to between 10 and 25 launchers from 140 to 200 launchers.America's eyes in space kept improving. The first Corona system was known as KH-1, or Keyhole 1, after its first-generation camera. A greatly improved camera known as KH-3 first flew in August 1961 and featured a faster lens and finer focus. Its ground resolution was 25 feet, compared with 40 feet for the first Corona satellite.The Corona KH-4 satellite, which first flew in February 1962 (the same month John Glenn became the first American to orbit Earth), had two cameras for stereo vision, one pointing slightly forward and the other slightly aft. This allowed photo interpreters on the ground to extract nearly three times as much information.An innovation of August 1963 was the KH-4A satellite, which had two film pods and carried an astonishing 160 pounds of film. The pods could be returned from space at separate times, doubling the length of the spy missions.Despite growing successes, the Corona satellites still had their share of bugs. One that came up periodically was the fogging of film, which was thought to occur as static electricity built up inside the spacecraft and suddenly discharged, causing a phenomenon known as corona -- no small irony. The problem returned with a vengeance as stereo cameras became the rule and redoubled the amount of film and the complexity of the film path.AdvertisementTo analyze this and other Corona problems, Dr. Wheelon, then the C.I.A.'s deputy director for science and technology, in 1963 recruited a new team of a dozen top American scientists, including Dr. Richard L. Garwin, a military analyst, and Dr. Sidney D. Drell of Stanford University, who led the group.The team not only fixed the fogging problem but over the decades played a pivotal role in helping design new generations of spy satellites. "Those guys were central," Dr. Wheelon said in an interview, calling their recruitment perhaps his "greatest contribution" to the nation's intelligence wars.By 1964, Corona had mapped all 25 of Moscow's long-range missile sites. Its coverage was so complete that intelligence reports could unequivocally state whether or not Moscow was building new missile complexes anywhere in the country, rather than reporting only ones that were discovered by accident."We've spent $35 billion or $40 billion on the space program," President Lyndon B. Johnson once remarked. "And if nothing else had come out of it except the knowledge we've gained from space photography, it would be worth 10 times what the whole program has cost. Because tonight we know how many missiles the enemy had and, it turned out, our guesses were way off. We were doing things we didn't need to do. We were building things we didn't need to build. We were harboring fears we didn't need to harbor."In 1964, Corona helped pinpoint where and when China would conduct its first nuclear explosion. "On the basis of new overhead photography, we are now convinced that the previously suspect facility at Lop Nur in western China is a nuclear test site which could be ready for use in about two months," the C.I.A. reported in a secret intelligence estimate of Aug. 26, 1964, that was prepared for the President and his top advisers.Two months later, on Oct. 16, 1964, China exploded its first atomic bomb, becoming the world's fifth nuclear power after the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France.Corona went on in 1967 to clarify the murky waters of the Middle East. After Arab-Israeli tensions erupted in a brief war, a KH-4A camera returned photo after photo of wrecked air bases, observing, according to a C.I.A. report, a total of 245 "probably destroyed" aircraft -- "201 in Egypt, 26 in Jordan and 18 in Syria."A C.I.A. secret history of the Corona program, written in 1973 after its termination, said: "The claims of the Israelis might have been discounted as exaggerations but for this timely photographic proof."AdvertisementThe current spurt of declassification has included not only the C.I.A. symposium but conferences in August at Lockheed and Itek, held on the 35th anniversary of Corona's first success.Sergei Khrushchev, son of the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev, told the Itek conference that one Corona film pod dropped into a Russian forest, where ax-wielding woodsmen chopped it up. Another spy satellite misdirected its film pod into a field in central Asia, where peasants wrapped the precious Kodak film around poles to provide solitude for a privy.Despite such blunders, Corona proved to be an enormous success. Experts say it paved the way for a reconnaissance era that was vital in preventing nuclear war."Corona marked the beginning of an explosion of intelligence data," John M. Deutch, Director of Central Intelligence, told the C.I.A. symposium in May. "That situation profoundly altered the course of the cold war and was probably instrumental in keeping us back from the nuclear threshold."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 12, 1995, on Page C00001 of the National edition with the headline: Spy Satellites' Early Role As 'Floodlight' Coming Clear. 
IMAGINE you are in the White House, drawing up a list of hot spots abroad where the nation's intelligence agencies should be nosing around. A few things to watch are obvious: Serbian troop movements, the Iraqi and North Korean nuclear programs, and China's military maneuvers off Taiwan's coast.But does it make sense for the Central Intelligence Agency to leap on the rumors -- which flew through Wall Street and Washington last week -- that a major Japanese bank might be about to go under? If it happened, such a collapse  could set off a cash crisis that could circle the globe in minutes, requiring the Federal Reserve to pump billions of dollars into the system to prevent what  the Treasury Department delicately calls "a contagion effect."With the Japanese Government unlikely to volunteer much information, learning the truth could require waging a surveillance campaign against Japan -- America's most important political friend in the Pacific -- with the same ferocity as is customary against a military opponent. It is a mystery whether the United States might be turning its elaborate spying equipment, some of it in Japan, on conversations between Japanese bankers and the Ministry of Finance. But many Japanese officials now believe it is likely.And that raises a question few in the Clinton Administration or the intelligence community are willing to discuss openly: Is the economic advantage  gained by such surveillance worth risking America's already rocky relationship with Japan?AdvertisementOr with so many in Washington officials repeating the mantra that economic security and national security are now synonymous, is such spying to be expected?The question of how far to go to secure American economic interests is especially sensitive in Washington these days, after revelations that the C.I.A. listened in on the conversations of Japanese negotiators during heated automobile talks last spring -- one example of what has quietly become routine practice. Japanese officials (who are among the world's premier practitioners of economic espionage) feigned shock and demanded explanations. The Administration, preparing for President Clinton's visit to Japan next month, responded that it wanted to think about its response.There is nothing new about spying on allies: Just ask the Israelis. Nor is assessing the economies of friends and enemies a new C.I.A. task: Its analysts spent four decades tracking the Soviet Union's industrial capability and the better part of last year peeling back the layers of Mexico's financial balancing acts.Still, the elevation of commercial interests to what Secretary of State Warren Christopher calls "the very top of our foreign policy agenda" has deepened the agency's clandestine economic intelligence-gathering."The question is the tradeoff," said Philip Zelikow, a former career diplomat now at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard who is completing a study of  the changed world of economic intelligence. "You have to ask whether this stuff  is worth the candle, or could you get to the same conclusions by massaging public and 'gray area' information. And then you have to balance it against other political interests."Mr. Zelikow and many members of the Clinton Administration say that the balancing is ad hoc at best, and usually does not happen at all. During the car  talks the C.I.A. was on autopilot: It was assumed that the Japanese, in the absence of eavesdropping satellites of their own, were using every other means to scope out the American position (including taking American journalists out to endless lunches), and that the United States should use every means at its disposal to do the same. Nor was there much discussion about the merits of spying against France on the GATT talks. There should have been; when the C.I.A. blundered, France asked the station chief and his underlings to leave, and intelligence liaison was suspended.Despite such incidents, so far nobody has worked out a system for insuring that there will be debate on the merits of an economic spying mission aimed at an ally. "We're quickly learning," one senior Administration official said this  week, "that we have to think through what is appropriate and what is not."An Intelligence FloodThe issue has crept up on the Administration because in just a few years, what had been a trickle of economic intelligence about Japan, Germany, France, Britain and others has turned into a torrent. Every day the Treasury, the United States Trade Representative's Office and the Commerce Department receive raw and digested intelligence on everything from France's position on letting more Hollywood movies into the European Union to the blandishments that foreign governments offer Indonesia's ministers for a slice of its boom in power generation.AdvertisementThe intelligence agencies, eager to prove that their $28 billion budget is as vital to American security as it was in the days of counting Soviet missiles, are more than happy to oblige. Their problem is "adding value;" in many cases, including the Japanese banking crisis, a wealth of data is already publicly available. Now, almost by default, the agency has become the integrator of the public and the secret."The fact of the matter is that the intelligence agencies are the center where all this is put together -- the economic, the political and the security concerns," said Robert B. Zoellick, a former top State Department official who handled much of the economic portfolio in the Bush Administration. "And perhaps  that makes sense, because they should have more detachment than the individual economic agencies would."Some, including traditionalists in the agency, say this is no way for a superpower to spend its intelligence resources. Winning a contract in China, they argue, will never be as central to national security as keeping Pakistan and India from a nuclear war.But more and more, policy makers are echoing the view of Jeffrey E. Garten, who just left his job as Under Secretary of Commerce for international trade to  become dean of Yale's school of management. He made the case that economic interests are still subordinated to political concerns too often -- even in this White House -- out of a fear that the United States not be seen to be using its  muscle for "crass mercantilism, unworthy of a great power and especially a lone  superpower.""That's the wrong way to look at it," he concluded. "If America can exercise  effective commercial diplomacy, its authority and leverage will be much more substantial, not just in the economic realm, but across the board."Such logic would lead to the conclusion that if the economic stakes are high  enough, it may make perfect sense to turn the nation's satellites on Japanese bankers. The problem is how to explain it to the Japanese when it all becomes embarrassingly public, as this sort of thing inevitably does. The State Department is still working on that one, and no one expects it to have a convincing answer any time soon.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 1995, on Page 4004004 of the National edition with the headline: THE WORLD;When Spies Look Out For the Almighty Buck. 
THE fight over military spending is heating up as the House and Senate duel over funds for key weapons and President Clinton threatens to veto any appropriations bill that includes money for arms the Pentagon says it does not want.Well, that is the standard story, anyway. And it is indeed true that the futures of three gee-whiz weapons systems -- the B-2 Stealth bomber, the Seawolf attack submarine and a pared-down Star Wars missile defense -- are under attack by deficit fighters. "Everyone is rummaging around in the basement now, looking for programs to trash," said William Hartung, a senior research fellow at the New School's World Policy Institute."But connoisseurs of the politics of denial need not despair," Mr. Hartung added. The few billion dollars that are on the line are petty cash compared with the quarter-trillion budgeted annually to be able to fight two wars simultaneously -- a relic of cold war planning that no elected official is questioning.It is easy to work up a righteous lather over the current weapons debate, which has all the Alice-in-Wonderland qualities of the earlier theological dispute over whether 10,000 nuclear warheads were sufficient to deter Soviet aggression. With 20 B-2 bombers already on order for $2.2 billion each -- each nearly the price of a nuclear aircraft carrier -- and serious questions being raised about the plane's stealthiness, support for building more is limited to a coalition of weapons contractors and members of Congress who have overdosed on Tom Clancy novels.AdvertisementMuch the same can be said for the third Seawolf submarine, priced at $1.5 billion, which is being rationalized as a means of keeping Connecticut and Virginia boat builders on the technological edge and Bill Clinton in the White House. "Even liberals now see defense spending as the form of pork least likely to be challenged," suggested Mr. Hartung, whose critical commentary on military budgeting appears in the fall issue of the World Policy Journal.In fact, the whole arms debate is taking place at the margin of reality. What really drives spending, argues Lawrence Korb of the Brookings Institution, is the underlying doctrine that dictates a very large and mobile military capable of fighting two wars the size of the Persian Gulf war at the same time.This policy was born in the last years of the Bush Administration, when the Soviet empire was collapsing, and the chances that Russia would commit the Red Army to a conventional war with any of America's allies was receding rapidly. Gen. Colin L. Powell, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, imagined worst-case developments that conveniently justified outlays and personnel equal to late cold war levels.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To be sure, the $250 billion budget for the two-war plan is far less in inflation-adjusted terms than defense spending in the Reagan years. But $250 billion, Mr. Korb notes, is still more than the combined spending for the world's next 10 largest military establishments. Is it really needed?Not according to Gen. Merrill McPeak, the recently retired Air Force Chief of Staff, who pointed out that America has fought major conventional wars just three times in the last 45 years -- and never two at a time. Indeed, the closer one looks at the two-war plan, the less realistic it seems. It is difficult to imagine two Iraq-like rogue states risking wars that America felt compelled to enter. On the other hand, it is difficult to imagine that America's next foes would cooperate with the Pentagon by leaving themselves wide open to American power.What's driving this nondebate over arms strategy, Mr. Korb argues, is the peculiar politics of the moment. "During the Reagan years, Democratic Congresses tried to chop away at spending," he said. But with the White House occupied by a Democrat who is eager to protect himself from charges of being soft on security, and Congressional moderates from both parties unprepared to take further whacks at jobs in the military industry, "the spending bar has been set so high that there is nothing really left to argue about," Mr. Korb said.The precondition for changing policy, Mr. Korb suggests, is a Republican in the White House who is less vulnerable to ideological attack. If Richard M. Nixon could go to China, he reasons, perhaps Bob Dole could trim the military budget to $200 billion. Mr. Hartung said $160 billion was a realistic target for one big war plus limited police actions.Another possibility is that military cuts will become the path of least resistance for a Congress caught between a pledge to balance the budget and 40 million older people who think Medicare is the greatest invention since Metamucil. But Mr. Hartung is not betting on it. "Defense contractors have moved quickly to make friends with the new Republican majority," he said.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 14, 1995, on Page D00002 of the National edition with the headline: Economic Scene; Without a two-war script, arms spending could really be cut. 
THE POOR IMPROVISE FOR BANK SERVICESIn six years, Silfrido Frias and Edwin B. Canaan have gone from running a one-room paralegal service in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan to establishing Sherman Plaza, a diverse enterprise with 2,000 square feet of new office space. The two men are lawyers trained in the Dominican Republic who have pursued their piece of the American dream without a bank loan. Lacking credit history, they cobbled together capital from relatives, credit cards and an informal revolving loan fund financed by other immigrants. Finally, they said, they turned to a loan shark, who handed over $10,000 at interest of 6 percent a week.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY AGREEMENT REACHED ON FESTIVALThe organizers of the Feast of San Gennaro will let New York City officials examine the books from last year's event to determine whether any of the proceeds went to organized crime, Mayor Giuliani said in announcing that the festival would begin as scheduled on Thursday. In addition, city auditors will study the festival to see whether enough of its proceeds are going to charity.  [ B3. ]COMPLAINT LEADS TO HOURLONG SIEGEIt was a strange story that quickly became stranger: About 9:30 A.M., an agitated man flagged down two police officers in a patrol car in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and told them that he had bought a gold chain for a woman, and that her husband had threatened him with a knife.  The man led them to an apartment house overlooking the Prospect Expressway, the officers said, where they were threatened in a dark hallway by men armed with a Mossbach combat shotgun and a Russian-made AK-47 automatic assault rifle.  [ B3. ]OFFICER'S ASSAILANT DIES IN CRASHAfter spending eight years in prison for shooting and paralyzing Officer Steven McDonald in Central Park in 1986, Shavod Jones, now 25, was released on parole last week. Early yesterday, the police said, Mr. Jones died from head injuries he suffered after he and a friend crashed into two parked cars while performing wheelies on a motorcycle in East Harlem. In 1986, Mr. Jones, then 15, was convicted of trying to kill Officer McDonald.  [ B2. ]AdvertisementFUNERAL HELD FOR WOMAN HELD CAPTIVEAs the church choir sang softly for her soul to rise safely to heaven, Gao Liqin lay in a simple blue wooden coffin in her finest attire: a white ruffled shirt and a frayed chocolate-colored wool coat. Clutching a picture of his dead wife and weeping, D. M. Zhang, an immigrant from Fujian, China, sobbed uncontrollably at Chinatown's Ng Fook Funeral Home. In broken sentences and disjointed words, he asked aloud in Chinese: what had unleashed the wrath of fury of his wife's captors that they would kill her in such a brutal way?  [ B6. ]SUBWAY STATION CLOSES; FIRST SINCE 1962Brooklyn's Franklin Avenue Shuttle has long stood apart from the rest of the city's subways, in ways more often grim than glorious. The shuttle's Dean Street station closed for business just after midnight, the first subway station shuttered since 1962. The official causes of death, given by the Transit Authority, were paltry patronage and budget cuts. The word on the streets of Bedford-Stuyvesant, however, was that the station died of official neglect.  [ B4. ] REGION PRIMARIES TO DECIDE FEUDSPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Republicans and Democrats will try to settle bitter intraparty feuds in primaries on Long Island and in Westchester County and Connecticut, hoping the fighting will not mar their chances of winning in November.  [ B8. ]Primary elections will be held in New York City, with polls open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. No primaries will be held in the Bronx or on Staten Island.  [ B8. ]SUIT IS SETTLED OVER STRIP SEARCHESThe New York State Department of Correctional Services has agreed to pay $1,000 to each of 85 female inmates who claimed that they were subjected to improper videotaped strip searches by guards at the Albion Correctional Facility outside Rochester. A department spokesman, James B. Flateau, said the settlement was not an admission of wrongdoing, but rather a concession to keep the case out of court. He added that the videotaping was justified and would continue.  [ B5. ]Chronicle B12We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 11, 1995, on Page B00001 of the National edition with the headline: METRO DIGEST. 
The Fourth World Conference on Women reached agreement early this morning on a wide-ranging declaration calling on world governments to raise the economic circumstances of women, protect them from increasing levels of violence and improve the status of girls throughout the world.The "platform for action" is to be presented for ratification later today, and the vote is expected to be unanimous. Some states, including the Vatican and other countries with large Muslim or Roman Catholic populations, may register objections to specific sections.The completion of the document brings to an end 10 days of debate on issues such as how to free women from poverty with new forms of credit, how to raise girls' education level and how to insure women's rights, including equal inheritance.In the morning hours, women groaned, cheered and applauded through the final arguments in an atmosphere largely free of rancor.  An Iranian slapped an Irish delegate on the back after they had gone head to head in a daylong negotiating session over sexual rights. Both seemed to like the outcome.AdvertisementWhile document will not bind countries to action, delegates say it gives the issues new visibility among governments and international agencies, and can serve as a template for national policies and legislation.After a series of key compromises on language relating to sexual rights and cultural and religious differences, delegates from 185 countries debated final sticking points until 4:45 A.M."We have a platform," said Patricia B. Licuanan, chairwoman of the final drafting meeting, which is to present the document later today."I promised we would be out of here before sunrise and I kept my promise," she said.Chief among the final obstacles to consensus was whether "sexual orientation" should be included in the antidiscrimination clauses of the document.But this language was jettisoned at 4:15 A.M. over the objection of more than 30 countries, including South Africa, whose delegation chief, Dr. Nkhosasna Zuna said, "We shall promise ourselves and future generations that we shall not discriminate against anyone ever again."The United States and Israel also spoke in favor of including sexual orientation.In an era of tight domestic budgets in many countries, the conference failed to win sizable financial commitments from governments to pay for new programs for women, but it managed to elicit a large number of pledges to redirect national budgets."There is not much new money around," said Msgr. Diarmuid Martin, a Vatican representative here, "but the benefit of these conferences is that they focus the attention of everyone on how money ought to be spent and how it can be refocused."India promised to raise the level of its investment in education with a focus on women and girls. Britain pledged to raise its child-care expenditures 20 percent. The United States is setting up a White House Council on Women and will step up attacks on domestic violence.AdvertisementThe conference ground to its conclusion with far less rancor than had been expected on the sensitive issues of contraception and abortion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thomas H. Kean, former Governor of New Jersey and the most prominent Republican on the 45-member delegation, said: "This is a document that guarantees the same rights for women that have long been enjoyed by men. I don't see why anyone would want to oppose it."This conference on women, which follows meetings that began in Mexico City in 1975, was suffused with a sense of urgency by the rise of the number of women in poverty and the systemic rape and violence directed at women in the "ethnic cleansing" campaigns in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.In the document's opening declaration, the conference will seek to "insure women's equal access to economic resources including land, credit, science and technology, vocational training, information, communication and markets, as a means to further advancement and empowerment of women and girls."China had hoped to be one of the greatest beneficiaries of this conference by virtue of Beijing's selection as its site. But instead, China's fears that pro-democracy and human rights campaigners among the delegates would set off a new outpouring of dissent against the Government led at times to heavy-handed and oppressive security measures.It seemed for a time that the controversy over China's security assault on the delegates would mar the visit of Hillary Rodham Clinton, who delivered the most forceful address of the conference on human rights.The greatest fear of many of the delegates was that they would have to debate once again the issues relating to women decided last year in Cairo at a United Nations conference on population and development.At that conference, the Vatican and countries with large Muslim and Roman Catholic populations sought to defeat a clear statement of a woman's right to regulate her fertility and reproductive health.But in Beijing, the Cairo declarations became a benchmark that many states, including the Vatican and Iran, sought to maintain.AdvertisementHowever, among the final sticking points early today was a footnote to the document that sought to subordinate some women's rights to national and religious customs. The footnote was finally rejected when a majority of delegations preferred to state the relationship between human rights and national custom in the document's preamble.The preamble now states: "While the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgroud must be borne in mind, it is the duty of states, regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms."Ms. Licuanan, in a ruling as chairwoman, struck the final compromise of the night when, to satisfy the competing interests in the hall, she killed both the sexual orientation references and the sensitive footnote.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 15, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: FORUM ON WOMEN AGREES ON GOALS. 
International A3-15  SERBS EVOKE PAST MARTYRDOMNews analysis: The Bosnian Serbs' commander accused NATO of attacking in a more brutal way than Hitler. The allusion underscores the Serbs' conviction that the world is against them. A1  NATO EXPANDS BOSNIA CAMPAIGNOn the eve of crucial American-led talks among the warring parties in Bosnia, NATO expanded its air campaign against Serb-held positions in Bosnia. A14  Serbs under attack say they have no choice but to defy the world. A14  Yeltsin warned the West against the NATO bombing in Bosnia. A15  AFTERMATH OF A HURRICANEWidespread looting seems to be the least of the problems facing people on the Caribbean island of St. Martin in the wake of a hurricane. A3  PROTESTERS RAMPAGE IN TAHITIHundreds of antinuclear demonstrators rampaged through Papeete, the capital of French Polynesia, setting parts of the city on fire after gutting the main passenger terminal at Tahiti's main airport. A8  ANOTHER BOMB HITS FRANCEAdvertisementA car bomb exploded outside a Jewish school in a suburb of Lyons, injuring 14 people and stirring fears of an escalation of terrorist tactics by Algerian Islamic militants. A8  Unlike China, Mongolia gave Hillary Clinton a warm welcome. A7  Moscow Journal: Vodka, but never without a toast. A4  National A16-24, D16-18  PACKWOOD SAYS HE'LL RESIGNSenator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, announced his resignation after the Senate ethics panel called for his expulsion after studying accusations that he made unwanted sexual advances, tried to obtain a job for his wife from people with legislative interests, and interferred with evidence.  A1  DETAILS IN PANEL REPORTThe Senate Ethics Committee's report on Bob Packwood tells a bizarre story of sex in the office.  A1  FUHRMAN WON'T RETURNJudge Lance A. Ito ruled that Detective Mark Fuhrman need not invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination once again, this time before jurors in the O.J. Simpson case.  A1  A NEW WAR ON HEARTBURNA $200 million-plus marketing battle has started as pharmaceutical giants try to carve out shares of what could become a multibillion-dollar market for nonprescription stomach remedies.  A1  JUVENILE CRIME CLIMBSPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If trends continue, the number of arrests of juveniles for violent crimes will double by 2010, the Justice Department said.  A16  SHADOWS OVER SANTA FEFor years, Santa Fe reveled in the good times, but now, high real estate costs, urban growth and crime are taking their toll.  A16  MOVE TO CURB SPECIES LAWHouse Republicans proposed to scale back the Endangered Species Act by making it voluntary for landowners to conserve the habitat of threatened creatures.  A20  MONEY FOR B-2 BOMBERSThe House approved financing to expand the fleet of B-2 bombers, a step the Pentagon opposes.  A21  STROKE DRUG IS UNDERUSEDAdvertisementA Government-backed study said that many doctors were underusing a proven drug therapy that could prevent 40,000 strokes a year.  A24  DEFENDING AN IDAHO SIEGEFederal firearms officials defended their use of an informer to lure a white separatist into a weapons violation that led to a deadly confrontation in rural Idaho.  D18  The space shuttle Endeavour lifted off on an 11-day mission.  A16  The White House refused to turn over papers Congress sought.  A19  Metro Digest B1  REV. MOON VISITS HIS CAMPUSThree years after the Rev. Sun Myung Moon and his Unification Church gained control of the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut, Mr. Moon made his first public appearance there yesterday.  A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-27  Edward Hopper's Nyack.  C1  A country idyll in Brooklyn.  C1  Salman Rushdie's first publicly scheduled appearance.  C3  The Joffrey moves to Chicago.C3  For Children C21  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: "Last of the Dogmen." C4  "The Promise." C8  "Theremin: An Electronic Odyssey." C8  "1-900." C10  "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar." C18  Music: Don Braden.  C3  Restaurants C22  Art: Face lift at the Met.  C1  Inside Art C23  Art in Review C26  "Recent Acquisitions." C24  A Diane Itter retrospective.  C26  Books: "Mrs. Ted Bliss," by Stanley Elkin.  C27  Television: TV Weekend D19  Home Video D20  Obituaries B9  Buster Mathis, heavyweight fighter.  Sports B10-17  Baseball: Ripken shares his day off.  B11  Pulsipher not blasted for rookie mistakes.  B13  Columns: Vecsey on Seles B11  Tennis: Courier joins Sampras in U.S. Open semifinals.  B11  Football: Jets' Lewis is unsure at new position.  B15  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  The Packwood resignation.  Dole's bogus welfare safeguards.  The detective takes the Fifth.  Peace in Liberia.  Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Bomb, kill, bomb.  Bob Herbert: Cops off the pedestal.  Anthony Lewis: How serious are we?  Tony Travers: New York is, or was, a model for London.  Chronicle A24  Crossword C27We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 8, 1995, on Page A00002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
Fund for Colleges Loses $128 Million  The Common Fund, which oversees almost $20 billion for colleges and other educational institutions, said it lost about $128 million after a rogue trader at First Capital Strategists, which manages securities owned by the fund, failed to hedge investments.The loss was discovered late on Thursday, and it was still not clear which of the fund's investors would suffer. The fund organizes investment programs for 1,421 colleges, including the University of Michigan, Vanderbilt University and the University of Southern California.  [ Page 1. ] Filibuster Blocks Budget Bill  A Senate vote on a package of midyear budget cuts negotiated by the White House and Congressional leaders was stalled when Senators Paul Wellstone of Minnesota and Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois, refusing to go along with the deal on the $16 billion bill, went into a filibuster.  [ 1. ] Dole Backs Microsoft  Bob Dole has criticized the Justice Department for what he said was "overzealous" conduct in its investigation of Microsoft's proposed on-line service.  [ 35. ] Mixed Signals on Economy  Gross domestic product grew 2.7 percent during the first quarter, the slowest growth in one and a half years. But factory orders rebounded in May, rising 1.4 percent.  [ 35. ] Profit Taking Slows Stocks  Stocks rose modestly, giving up bigger gains in the last hour of trading as portfolio managers booked profits in the best performing issues before the end of the second quarter. The Dow industrials closed up 5.54, at 4,556.10, after a late afternoon sell-off pared gains of more than 30 points. The average fell 29.74 for the week.  [ 37. ] BellSouth to Take a Charge  BellSouth said it was altering accounting methods because of regulatory change and would take a $2.7 billion noncash charge.  [ 35. ] N.B.A. Locks Out Players  The National Basketball Association said it was locking out its players and suspending its operations until a new collective bargaining agreement was reached. It was the first labor action in N.B.A. history.  [ 27. ] Taiwanese Trade Ban Lifted  President Clinton announced that the United States was lifting trade sanctions on imports of Taiwanese sea and wildlife products like coral jewelry and lizard boots, a move that may further provoke China.  [ 4. ] GTE Shuffles Management  GTE announced sweeping changes in its management. It named Kent B. Foster to the new position of president, and Nicholas L. Trivisonno, executive vice president of strategic planning, promptly resigned.  [ 35. ] Citicorp in High-Level Shifts  Rearranging the highest ranks at Citicorp, John S. Reed, the chairman, named new leaders for the business areas that he expects to be most critical for growth.  [ 35. ] Boeing to Cut Production  Boeing said it would scale back production of its 737 and 757 commercial jets, but said the changes would not result in job losses beyond those announced earlier this year.  [ 36. ] Bolivia Sells Stake in Utility  Bolivia has sold a controlling interest in its state electricity company to three American companies for $139.8 million.  [ 34. ] I.M.F. Funds to Mexico  The International Monetary Fund released the second half of its Mexican aid package, saying that the Government's emergency stabilization effort had significantly improved the country's economic condition. About $2 billion of the remaining $10.7 billion in assistance will be immediately available to Mexico.  [ 34. ] Plan for Hong Kong Airport  Ending a four-year dispute, Britain and China agreed on a financing plan for Hong Kong's new airport, clearing the last major hurdle for the $20.3 billion project.  [ 34. ]We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 1995, on Page 1001033 of the National edition with the headline: Business Digest. 
Since Sunday morning, the jurors in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and nine others have been locked in a heavily guarded room, wrestling with the prosecutors' assertion that the defendants plotted to wage "a war of urban terrorism" against America.During eight months of testimony, lawyers on both sides have made an art of trying to read the jurors, who have been kept anonymous for their own security. Like anthropologists studying a lost tribe, the lawyers have searched for clues to the jurors' thoughts in a roll of the eyes, a glassy stare, a wink, a sigh, an angry look.For instance, Juror No. 2, a 59-year-old computer specialist from Manhattan, took copious notes, rolled her eyes at defense lawyers and beamed when the prosecutors made their closing arguments. "She's a queen for the prosecution," said one defense lawyer, requesting anonymity.And Juror No. 7, a fresh-faced 35-year-old telecommunications worker from Mount Pleasant, N.Y., who was extremely attentive during the defense summations, objected to having his belongings searched during deliberations, a sign that he will question authority, lawyers said. "He's definitely got a heart," said another defense lawyer, who insisted on anonymity. "But we don't know how strong he is."AdvertisementNo one but District Judge Michael B. Mukasey and his clerk know the names and addresses of the 12 people who are deliberating a range of charges that include attempted bombing, murder, seditious conspiracy to overthrow the United States Government and conspiracy to bomb New York landmarks. But court documents reveal that they are an unusual group for a Federal jury in Manhattan, in that most of them are black or Hispanic, and most are from the Bronx.Defense lawyers believe this will work against the prosecution. Conventional wisdom holds that poor people from minority neighborhoods are more likely to believe the authorities can make mistakes than more affluent jurors are."All other things being equal," said one of the defense lawyers, Wesley M. Serra, "people from the Bronx are so distrustful of authorities that they make good jurors."The lawyers admit that reading a jury is not a science, but the best guess of the defense is that when deliberations began, at least two jurors appeared to be in the prosecution's camp while at least three seemed skeptical of the prosecution. The rest are either difficult to read or, in the view of the lawyers, likely to follow whatever the majority decides."I think there are matched some strong personalities on both sides," said Lynne F. Stewart, Mr. Abdel Rahman's lawyer. "But I still have to say it has more of a lean to the defense side. This is a jury that can hear arguments of outrageous government misconduct and believe them."Prosecutors declined to comment about the jury."We just won't have any comment until the verdict is in," said Marvin Smilon, a spokesman for the United States Attorney's office.The jurors have sat through often tedious testimony from 200 witnesses in the largest terrorism case ever tried in America, unable to say a word about what they think. In the last few days, they have given at least some clue as to what is on their minds.First, they sent out several notes asking for testimony about two defendants who played peripheral roles in the bombing plot, Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny and Mohammad Saleh. Then, on Wednesday, their requests for testimony suggested that they had moved on to the murder charge against El Sayyid Nosair, the man accused of killing Rabbi Meir Kahane, a radical Zionist, in November 1991.AdvertisementOn Thursday, their focus seemed to shift back to Mr. Elgabrowny, as they asked the judge a legalistic question: Does a search warrant for Mr. Elgabrowny's house allow Federal agents to search his person as well? Later in the afternoon, they asked for testimony from a telephone call between Mr. Elgabrowny and an FBI informer, Emad A. Salem.Entering a fourth day of deliberations yesterday, the jury began asking to review the testimony of another prosecution witness, Abdo Mohammed Aggag, who testified that Mr. Abdel Rahman had approved a plot to assassinate President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in April 1993.As a whole, they are a mature group; the youngest is 35. There are six men and six women. Six of the jurors are white, two of them Hispanic, and six are black. Seven are from the Bronx, three from Westchester County and two from Manhattan.Four of the 12 jurors graduated from college. The rest have at least a high school education, many with some college credits. Their occupations are varied: mail carrier, accountant, transit worker, computer programmer, telecommunications worker, civil clerk, mental health worker, bank employee and hospital worker.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Juror No. 2, the computer specialist, who said she regularly reads The New York Times, Gourmet magazine and the Harvard Health Newsletter and watches the "MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour," has served on five previous juries. She rolled her eyes and sighed when Roger Stavis, the lawyer for Mr. Nosair, rose for cross-examinations and closing arguments. She worries the defense.Juror No. 9 is also a concern. A 36-year-old medical technician and former marine, he went pale as linen when the prosecution played a tape of Mr. Abdel Rahman expressing approval after United States servicemen died in Somalia."That guy looked like somebody put a mask of ice on his face," Ms. Stewart said.On the other side, the defense has high hopes for Juror No. 7, the telecommunications worker, who has two young children and has done volunteer work for the homeless in Manhattan. And they see Nos. 3 and 4 as possibly sympathetic.Defense lawyers point out that Juror No. 3, a 61-year-old bank employee from the Bronx, rolled her eyes often during the testimony of Mr. Salem, the prosecution's main witness, whom they have tried to paint as a liar. She also laughed and smiled at the antics of two defense lawyers, John Jacobs and Valerie Amsterdam, who purposely bickered like an old married couple for the jury's amusement as they tried to cast doubt on F.B.I. agents who handled crucial tape recordings."She's the kind of African-American woman who doesn't mind telling white Americans that they are wrong," said Anthony Ricco, a lawyer for Mr. Elgabrowny who fought to keep No. 3 on the panel.AdvertisementJuror No. 4, the foreman, a 39-year-old man with three children, seemed "very tuned in" during the entire trial and appeared to catch all the nuances of the testimony, Ms. Stewart said. He also shocked the court one day by arriving with a shaved head.One day, however, he betrayed some hostility toward one defendant, Tarig Elhassan, giving him a murderous look after the prosecution ran a tape recording of Mr. Elhassan saying Americans should be killed. Nevertheless, the defense lawyers still believe he is open-minded and could argue for some acquittals."I don't think he's a man with an agenda," Mr. Ricco said.Each of the other jurors has a distinct reputation. For instance, Juror No. 1, a 40-year-old letter carrier, wore sunglasses the entire trial and showed no emotion. Juror No. 6, a 50-year-old hospital worker from the Bronx and a native of Puerto Rico, took few notes and spent a lot of time smiling at people in the gallery. Some courtroom regulars nicknamed him "happy face.""He's a follower," one defense lawyer said. "He's just along for the ride."Juror No. 8, a 55-year-old transit worker who moved to New York from Alabama, was known as the sleepy juror, because she seemed to be napping through some of the boring testimony.Juror No. 5, a 58-year-old management consultant from Scarsdale, gave up a trip to China to serve on the jury. She is well-traveled, and the defense took heart because she had visited Israel in April 1993 with her church group to speak to Palestinians about their problems.But during summations, she avoided eye contact with the defense attorneys, which some said they took as a bad sign.As the deliberations ground on, the defense lawyers lounged in rooms furnished with cast-off chairs and makeshift tables. Some played gin and backgammon, while others caught up on their pulp fiction."Tea leaves, tea leaves," said Steven M. Bernstein, a lawyer for Amir Abdelgani, as he slapped down his losing gin hand."It's not even tea leaves," responded Ms. Stewart. "It's Ouija boards and crystal balls." PROFILE  As They Reach a Verdict The jury is out in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and nine other defendants. Here is biographical information on the jurors from court transcripts, jury consultants and lawyers. JUROR No. 1 Black male, 40, lives in the Bronx, letter carrier, Baptist, single, completed 12th grade, born in Charleston, S.C., served in a tank corp in the Army in 1974-1975. JUROR No. 2 White female, 59, lives in Manhattan, unemployed computer specialist, Episcopalian, married to a securities analyst, college graduate, born in England ... widely traveled, including the Middle East, served on five state juries, reads The New York Times and Harvard Health letter, had an Arab friend who died of cancer.  JUROR No. 3 Black female, 61, lives in Manhattan, Protestant, divorced, high-school graduate, one year of business school, born in Lackawanna, N.J. ... served on state juries, reads The New York Times, Daily News, Readers Digest. JUROR No. 4 White male, 39, born and lives in Mount Vernon, N.Y., works in telecommunications, Catholic, married to a secretary, three children, two years of college ... served on state juries, reads Sports Illustrated and Stereo Review ... elected jury foreman. JUROR No. 5 White female, 58, lives in Scarsdale, management consultant, Protestant, married to a publishing executive, a college graduate, born in Boston ... traveled to Israel in 1993 with a church group, brother was an Assistant United States Attorney in the 1960's and 1970's ... gave up a trip to China to serve on the jury. JUROR No. 6 Hispanic male, 50, lives in the Bronx, hospital worker, Catholic, married, born in Puerto Rico, served in the Army. JUROR No. 7 White male, 35, lives in Mount Pleasant, works in telecommunications, Congregationalist, married with two young children, wife is in sales, a college graduate, born in Arlington, Mass ... does volunteer work for the homeless. JUROR No. 8 Black female, 55, lives in the Bronx, transit worker, Baptist, married with two grown children, completed 12th grade, born in Alabama ... has traveled to London, served on state juries.  JUROR No. 9 Hispanic male, 36, lives in the Bronx, medical technician, Catholic, married, with wife pregnant, one year of college, former Marine.  JUROR No. 10 Black female, 48, lives in the Bronx, Baptist, mental health worker, divorced, three years of college, born in Roanoke, Va ... listens to WBLS radio, doesn't read newspapers. JUROR No. 11 Black male, 48, lives in the Bronx, transit worker, Baptist, married with three grown children, wife works in computers, completed 12th-grade, born in Orangeburg, S.C. ... reads Sports Illustrated and listens to Kiss FM, served on state juries.  JUROR No. 12 Black female, 40, lives in the Bronx, banking officer, Baptist, single with 16-year-old child, college graduate ... reads no newspapers, watches Channel 7 news.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 30, 1995, on Page 1001021 of the National edition with the headline: The Art of Jury Reading; Lawyers in Terror Trial Study Every Tie. 
THE Prague Chamber Orchestra and the Bolshoi Symphony of Russia are among the international ensembles participating in the 40th anniversary concert series at Jorgensen Auditorium at the University of Connecticut in Storrs. Other visitors will include the Haydn Trio of Vienna, the Veryovka Ukrainian Dance Company and the Central Ballet of China.All six UConn subscription cycles begin in October. An adaptation of E. B. White's "Charlotte's Web" will start a children's series on Oct. 1. The ensemble Uakti, blending Brazilian music and jazz, gives the first Earth Rhythm concert on Oct. 5. Dance Spectrum begins on Oct. 7 with the Mark Morris Group. L'Orchestre de la Suisse Romande opens the masters series on Oct. 18. And the chamber series gets under way on Oct. 24 with the Korean Chamber Ensemble.A brochure about the programs is available from the box office, 486-4226. A listing of UConn's faculty and student concerts, most of them free, can be obtained by calling 486-2260."After five full seasons of presenting the finest classical and popular artists, we feel comfortable in assuming the role of neighbor instead of newcomer," said the director of the Quick Center at Fairfield University, Tom Zingarelli. More than two dozen events are on the center's agenda, from the Tokyo String Quartet's opening recital on Sept. 29 through Tom Chapin's folk song finale on April 28, with separate subscription series devoted to classical recitals, theater, dance and children's concerts. The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center has its own cycle of three programs, and the special-events calendar includes a "Jazz at Lincoln Center" evening led by Wynton Marsalis (254-4010).AdvertisementWesleyan University in Middletown also has a crowded concert schedule, including faculty presentations, world music demonstrations and performances by student ensembles, many of them with little or no admission charges. But the university's musical pride and joy is the Crowell Hall Series, which opens on Sept. 13th with a jazz-fusion "Tribute to Julius Hemphill" by the pianist Ursula Oppens, the composer's widow, who will be joined by two former Hemphill band members, the saxophonists Marty Ehrlich and Tim Berne, and several other veteran players. Later programs include the Chinese Music Consort of New York, Kronos Quartet, Calliope Renaissance Band, the Massachusetts Chamber Players and the pianist Dmitri Rachmanov (685-3355).Enticing new seasons are also in place for the Chamber Music Society at Yale, the Wilton Candlelight Series, the Armstrong Chamber Concerts, the Danbury Concert Association and two Friends of Music groups, one in Newtown, the other covering five Fairfield County communities.The Tokyo String Quartet opens both the Yale and Wilton cycles. The Yale series, at Sprague Memorial Hall in New Haven, begins on Sept. 26, with the monthly concerts thereafter presenting the St. Lawrence, Colorado, Emerson, Berlin Philharmonic and Rosamonde Quartets, with a return of the Tokyo group in February (432-4158).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the Wilton Congregational Church, the candles will be lit for the Tokyo Quartet on Oct. 1. The remaining concerts there feature the Chestnut Brass Company, the Diaz String Trio and -- at the March finale -- the return of the Greek violinist Leonidas Kavakos (762-3401 or 762-8354).Armstrong Chamber Concerts return to the Congregational Church in Washington on Oct. 8. The series's founding violinist, Helen Armstrong, will be joined that afternoon by the violist John Graham and the cellist Frederick Zlotkin, and by a different contingent of guests on each of three later Sundays. (868-0522).The Danbury Concert Association begins its season on Oct. 15 with the chamber orchestra I Musici de Montreal and its music director, the cellist Yuli Turovsky. Thereafter, visitors will include the West Point Cadet Glee Club, the Ames Piano Quartet, and the pianist Pamela Mia Paul. Subscriptions are mandatory; tickets will not be sold for individual concerts (748-0522).Newtown Friends of Music are remaining loyal to their longtime convocations at the Edmond Town Hall. Their cycle of five Sunday afternoon recitals begins on Oct. 22 with the St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble. The other programs feature the Parisii Quartet, the Bachmann-Klibonoff-Fridman Trio, the pianist Mia Chung and the Shanghai String Quartet (426-6470).Igor Kipnis has succeeded Ruth Steinkraus Cohen as president of Friends of Music of Fairfield County. His plans include expanding the concert series to locales other than Westport and the inclusion of a big-name benefit, a recital by Isaac Stern on Jan. 7 at the Stamford Palace.The organization still has a roster of visiting artists, starting on Oct. 8 with a concert at St. Stephen's Church in Ridgefield by the Colorado String Quartet, and continuing with monthly appearances by artists like the baritone William Sharp, the pianist Santiago Rodriguez, the Toronto-based ensemble Millennium and, in April at the Benedictine Grange in West Redding, the Cavani Quartet. A separate but related lecture and film series scheduled for the Wednesday evening preceding each concert, at the Westport Library (938-3767 or 834-1069).We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this review appears in print on August 27, 1995, on Page CN13 of the National edition with the headline: MUSIC; Overseas Ensembles in Recital, 'Charlotte's Web'. 
For the third straight time, a team of the best women players in the world defeated a team of illustrious senior men. The event was the fourth running of an informal annual series sponsored by the Max Euwe Association and held this year in early July in Prague.The women won by a tally of 26 1/2-23 1/2. They were led by the grandmasters Judit Polgar of Hungary and Pia Cramling of Sweden, who both scored 6 1/2-3 1/2, followed by the women's world champion, Xie Jun of China, at 5-5, the grandmaster Zsuzsa Polgar of Hungary, at 4 1/2-5 1/2, and the international master Nana Ioseliani of the Republic of Georgia, at 4-6.The men in the event were the grandmaster Viktor Korchnoi, 5 1/2-4 1/2; two former world champions, Boris Spassky of France and Vasily Smyslov of Russia, 5-5; the grandmaster Vlastimil Hort of Germany, 4 1/2-5 1/2, and Lajos Portisch of Hungary, 3 1/2-6 1/2. They ranged in age from 51 (Hort) to 74 (Smyslov).Cramling revived an almost forgotten gambit to defeat Portisch in the first round after mistakes by both players balanced out.AdvertisementIn the Kavalek Variation of the Fianchetto System of the King's Indian Defense, 6 . . . c6 and 7 . . . Qa5, attention has centered lately on 9 Qd3 Qa6 10 b3, but a Schwartzman-Hulak game in Wijk-aan-Zee in January showed Black getting the upper hand after 10 . . . d5 11 Ne5 Rd8 12 Bb2 dc 13 Nc4 Bc4! 14 bc Nbd7 15 Ne4 Ne4 16 Qe4 Nb6 17 c5 Na4 18 Rab1 Nb2 19 Rb2 Bd4. So Portisch chose the alternative 9 d5 cd 10 Nd4.Had he forgotten about the little-known but never-rebuffed sacrifice with 10 . . . dc!? 11 Ne6 fe 12 Bb7 Nbd7 13 Ba8 Ra8? Cramling was not averse to giving up a rook for a knight and pawn as long as she obtained a strong center that would make it difficult for White to mobilize his forces.Portisch should have tried to free his position with 17 e4!?, even if it cost White a second pawn. Instead, he first temporized with 17 f3 and soon concentrated his strategy on getting an open b file with 22 b3. But that failed when Cramling's pressure on the b file forced him to close it with 24 b4. The white pieces gained no mobility.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Cramling put her center pawns into attacking position with 26 . . . e5, she already had the only winning chances.On 30 . . . Bf8, it was doubtful that Portisch should have spent time on a defense of the b pawn with 31 Be1 because he would have had no recourse against 31 . . . Qc7 followed by 32 . . . Nb8 and 33 . . . Nc6. Accordingly, he tried to work up an attack on the black king with 31 h4 and 32 h5.With 35 . . . c3, Cramling started to put her central pawn mass to use, confident that her king could not be successfully attacked. At the first opportunity she opened her own attack with 41 . . . e4!It was no use for Portisch to defend by 43 Kf3 Bd2 44 Bd6 because 44 . . . Nf6 45 Be5 de 46 Kf2 e3 47 Kf1 Qg4 wins.Cramling proceeded steadily toward victory until she blundered with 57 . . . Bc3? instead of playing 57 . . . Nc3! But Portisch failed to exploit this with 58 Rc8!, falling back into a lost game with 58 Ba3?After 58 . . . c1/Q 59 Bc1 Nc1, it was futile to go on with 60 a6 e2 61 a7 e1/ Q. Portisch gave up.KING'S INDIAN DEFENSE             White   Black          Portisch   Cramling       1   d4   Nf6       2   c4   g6       3   Nf3   Bg7       4   g3   O-O       5   Bg2   d6       6   Nc3   c6       7   O-O   Qa5       8   h3   Be6       9   d5   cd       10   Nd4   dc       11   Ne6   fe       12   Bb7   Nbd7       13   Ba8   Ra8       14   Bd2   d5       15   Be1   Qa6       16   Rb1   Rc8       17   f3   Qc6       18   g4   Nb6       19   a4   a6       20   a5   Nbd7       21   Na4   Rb8       22   b3   Ne8       23   Qc2   Qb5       24   b4   Nd6       25   Bg3   Qc6       26   Rfd1   e5       27   Nc3   e6       28   Qa4   Nb5       29   Nb5   Rb5       30   Qc2   Bf8       31   h4   Bb4       32   h5   Kf7       33   Kg2   Bf8       34   hg   hg       35   Qa2   c3       36   Rb5   Qb5       37   Rb1   Qc6       38   Qc2   Bh6       39   Rh1   Kg7       40   Bh4   Be3       41   Be7   e4       42   fe   Qc4       43   Rd1   Bd2       44   Kf1   Qe4       45   Qe4   de       46   Ba3   Ne5       47   Ra1   e3       48   Bc5   Ng4       49   Rb1   Nf2       50   Bd4   Kh6       51   Rb6   Ne4       52   Kg2   c2       53   Bb2   Nc3       54   Kf3   e5       55   Ra6   e4       56   Kg4   Ne2       57   Ra8   Bc3       58   Ba3   c1/Q       59   Bc1   Nc1       60   ResignsWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 15, 1995, on Page C00012 of the National edition with the headline: Chess. 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher got a telephone call at 7 A.M.: on the line were Yasir Arafat and Shimon Peres, announcing they had reached an agreement on Palestinian self-rule. During the call, Mr. Peres, Israel's Foreign Minister, praised Dennis B. Ross, the Administration's top Mideast negotiator, for conducting "the first shuttle diplomacy by telephone."Mr. Ross got a call even earlier, when Israel's top negotiator reached him at home in Bethesda, Md., at 3 A.M. to plead for help in calming Mr.  Arafat, the P.L.O. leader. He had stormed out of the talks on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories, screaming that Israel was trying to shove an unfair map down his throat.From 3:15 A.M. to 6 A.M., Mr. Ross worked the phones, talking with Mr. Arafat, with Mr. Peres, with the chief Palestinian negotiator, Ahmed Qurai, and with Israel's top negotiator, Uri Savir. His message to the two sides, who were negotiating frantically seven time zones away in Taba, Egypt, was that they should not let the talks fall apart over one or two issues when they were just a few steps from the end of a year of high-pressure talks.Then, after a last-minute flourish of concessions and brainstorming about security arrangements and which side would control what part of the West Bank, the two sides struck the long-awaited agreement that established how Palestinian self rule would be expanded.AdvertisementPresident Clinton was quick to praise the two sides for taking what he called a major step forward in the often-stalled peace effort, but Administration officials were not shy about claiming some credit either."We've been indispensable," said a senior Administration official. "Without the United States's constant nurturing of the peace process, that process would not go forward. Things can go constantly wrong. A lot of reassurance is needed, and they've looked to us for that reassurance."American officials are eager to point out the Administration's active role in the talks after they were embarrassed about being cut out of the secret negotiations in Norway that led to the "Declaration of Principles" the Israelis and the P.L.O. reached two years ago.Administration policymakers insist that holding the signing ceremony at the White House was not intended so Mr. Clinton could bask in the glow of a new Middle East success. Rather, they insist, the Israelis and Palestinians beseeched Mr. Clinton to have the ceremony at the White House because the location will add weight to the accord, line up international support for it, and add momentum to the peace effort.During the last four months, the Administration repeatedly set dates for a White House ceremony to create an incentive -- and a deadline -- for the Palestinians and Israelis to finish their talks. The White House had to keep postponing the ceremony as the two sides continued to miss their negotiating deadlines.After the agreement was announced today, Mr. Clinton worked the phones, calling Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Mr. Arafat to congratulate them. He also called King Hussein of Jordan, King Hassan II of Morocco, and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt to invite them to the signing ceremony scheduled for Thursday.As the 1996 presidential campaign picks up steam, the Clinton Administration is promoting anything that adds to its list of foreign policy successes. While the Administration can claim the lion's share of credit for restoring democracy to Haiti and recent progress in the Bosnian peace talks, even many senior officials acknowledge that the Administration has not played a central role in the Middle East talks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."The burden of the negotiations was theirs, it was not ours," said a senior State Department official. "They are the ones who constantly came up with imaginative solutions to deal with their problems. What they needed from us was a kind of intensive help in terms of getting them to crystallize what the real problems were. They felt they could use us as a sounding board and help explain their position to the other side."But the United States -- and Mr. Ross -- were more than a sounding board, and came up with unusual solutions when necessary. For example, to help resolve the deadlock over whether Israeli security forces could remain in the town of Hebron, Mr. Ross told the Palestinians that Washington would give generous aid for water projects in Hebron.AdvertisementDuring the last two weeks, Mr. Ross was on the phone three or four times a day with the top Israeli and Palestinian negotiators, often explaining to each side what the other needed from an agreement to make its domestic constituency happy."Each side was extremely attentive to what they felt could be handled by their respective publics," said one American diplomat.Secretary of State Christopher has relied heavily on Mr. Ross in the talks because he has had his hands full juggling China, Russia, Bosnia and the Middle East. Adhering to his modus operandi of handing out key portfolios to trusted assistants, Mr. Christopher deputized Mr. Ross to handle the Middle East talks, just as he has deputized Assistant Secretary of State Richard C. Holbrooke to handle the Bosnia talks.While Mr. Ross, 46, is far less well-known and far more self-effacing than Henry Kissinger, the man who invented shuttle diplomacy, Israeli and Palestinian negotiators have repeatedly looked to him to help hold together the fragile talks.In coaching the two sides, the soft-spoken Mr. Ross urged Mr. Qurai and Mr. Savir, the top Palestinian and Israeli negotiators respectively, to begin marathon talks a week ago Wednesday. His recommendation: They should decide which of the 200 outstanding disputes were technical or minor ones that could be quickly resolved by underlings and which were major ones that could be resolved only by Mr. Arafat and Mr. Peres.Following Mr. Ross's advice, Mr. Qurai and Mr. Savir settled the numerous smaller problems and last weekend handed Mr. Arafat and Mr. Peres a small heap of manageable yet major issues to resolve. After negotiating past midnight for most of the week, they whittled down the number of disputes and finally created confidence that the end of the talks was near.Although the United States has sought to be the neutral referee, Mr. Ross occasionally told each side when he thought it was going too far. On one occasion, he criticized the Palestinians for asking too much in delicate negotiations over Hebron -- a town that has been an obstacle because of Israel's reluctance to withdraw all its troops, leaving a small Jewish settlement there unprotected."We thought the Palestinians were pushing too much, and we told them," said one American official.The Palestinians backed down, the Hebron issue was resolved, enabling the two parties to reach agreement.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 25, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: MIDEAST ACCORD: IN WASHINGTON; Twist to Shuttle Diplomacy: U.S. Aide Mediated by Phone. 
WITH every new drug company merger in the last few years has come speculation about which company will be the next target. One by one, the rumored candidates have been picked off -- with the Warner-Lambert Company as the main exception.Attention turned again to Warner-Lambert yesterday after the Upjohn Company, perennially seen as a takeover target, agreed to merge with Pharmacia A.B. of Sweden. That deal came on the heels of the announcement last week by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. of a hostile takeover offer for Fisons P.L.C.But the trading yesterday in the stocks of Upjohn and Pharmacia may provide a cautionary tale for investors intent on speculating that more mergers are imminent in the drug industry.The share prices of both Upjohn and Pharmacia fell sharply yesterday morning as traders expressed their disappointment that Pharmacia, a Swedish drug maker, did not make a cash bid for Upjohn. Under the terms of the proposed merger, Upjohn holders will receive 1.45 shares in a new company for each share of Upjohn stock they own, while Pharmacia shareholders will get one share for each current share.AdvertisementBut the stocks rebounded after the companies met with analysts to discuss the deal's merits. Upjohn shares closed up $1.125, at $40.75, after falling as low as $37.625 in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange. American depository receipts of Pharmacia rose $1.125 in Nasdaq trading, to $26.50, after reaching as low as $24. Each A.D.R. represents one share.The rebounds came after yesterday's meeting highlighted new anti-cancer products emerging from Upjohn's research department, said Richard R. Stover, president of Stover Haley Burns, a health care research firm in Stamford, Conn. "I found it interesting reading all the commentary that Upjohn does not have a pipeline of new products," he said.The combination of Upjohn's sales force in the United States with Pharmacia's franchise in cancer drugs could more than double the new company's share of the anti-cancer market over the next five years, Mr. Stover added.Similarly, investors who are disappointed with Warner-Lambert's drug pipeline may be overlooking some of the company's attributes. "I think everybody believes Warner-Lambert somewhere along the line has to do something," Mr. Stover said. "Their drug business is not competitive and it will not be so over the next four to five years on their own."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the company has a valuable consumer franchise, including products like Trident chewing gum and Schick razor blades. Lisa B. Tuckerman, a health care analyst with Spears, Benzak, Salomon & Farrell, said that might make Warner-Lambert attractive to a company like Procter & Gamble, which has a small pharmaceutical unit, or Bristol-Myers Squibb, which might want to expand its product lines."I think Warner-Lambert is in a bit of a corner to do something strategically to protect themselves," Ms. Tuckerman said.Because an acquisition of Warner-Lambert might cost up to $14 billion, there are a limited number of potential buyers, she said. If one emerges, it might be from an unexpected part of the globe. "All of the recent deals that have been done have been with American and European companies," Ms. Tuckerman said. "None of the Japanese companies have made much of an effort to get access to the research and development programs of the American and European companies."With the pharmaceutical and consumer-product markets growing rapidly in China and Russia, she said, Japanese companies might be interested in a company like Warner-Lambert. "There are huge, untapped markets at Japan's back door, and it would be beneficial for a company to have access there with the kind of brands that Warner-Lambert owns," she said.Warner-Lambert has long kept a vow of silence on such speculation. "The market indeed is undergoing a lot of changes, and people are reacting to it in different ways," a company spokesman said. "But we would like to remain independent. Anything else is speculative."With so many acquisitions in recent years, Mr. Stover said, the list of potential candidates has become short. "It will be harder to make a quick, nondilutive acquisition and pay for it by cutting expenses," he said. "Consolidation is going to continue, but in fits and starts. I'm not sure we're going to see a wave of consolidation."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 22, 1995, on Page D00008 of the National edition with the headline: Market Place; After the Upjohn deal, takeover talk turns to Warner-Lambert. 
Brig. Gen. James H. Howard, the only fighter pilot to win the Medal of Honor in aerial combat over Europe in World War II, died on Saturday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center at Bay Pines, Fla. He was 81 and lived in Belleair Bluffs, Fla.He had suffered a long illness, his family said.General Howard earned the nation's highest military honor in January 1944, when he became separated from his fighter squadron of P-51 Mustangs. Finding himself alone, he flew to the defense of B-17 bomber formations after a raid over central Germany.For more than 30 minutes he fought off some 30 German fighters attacking the Flying Fortresses. He was credited with shooting down at least four German craft before being forced to return to base in England.He dismissed the matter with a simple response, "I seen my duty and I done it."His parents were missionaries in in Canton, and he spent his first 14 years in China. He studied at Pomona College in California but left in 1937 to go to the Navy's flying school in Pensacola, Fla.AdvertisementHe became a flier with the American volunteer group, the Flying Tigers, who helped to defend China against the Japanese. Its pilots were chosen by Col. Claire L. Chennault.In 13 months of action over Burma and China, beginning in December 1941, he flew 56 missions and was credited with shooting down six Japanese planes. When the Flying Tigers disbanded, he returned to the United States and was sworn into the Army Air Forces in 1943.The Mustang P-51 was new then, and he took command of a squadron assigned to protect bomber groups during raids over Europe. At the end of the war, he was in charge of Pinellas Army Air Field in Florida.After leaving the military, he operated a systems-engineering company in Washington. He retired in 1977.General Howard is survived by a stepdaughter, Nancy Smith of Gainesville, Fla, and two sisters, Martha Johnson of Cambridge, Mass., and Margaret Steele of Hightstown, N.J.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this obituary; biography appears in print on March 22, 1995, on Page B00008 of the National edition with the headline: Gen. James Howard, 81, Dies; Medal Winner in Aerial Combat. 
Straight out of Boise State University, Steven R. Appleton joined a local memory-chip maker called Micron Technology Inc. in 1983. It soon seemed that he had chosen a dead-end career.In the mid-1980's, the memory-chip business appeared to be lost forever to Japan. One major American semiconductor company after another, even Intel, the memory-chip pioneer, dropped out of the field, figuring that it would always be a poor business."Back then," recalled Mr. Appleton, who is now Micron's chairman, "it was just a matter of survival for us. "The company, based in Boise, Idaho, is doing far more than surviving these days. For its 1995 fiscal year, which ended last week, analysts expect its profit to double, to more than $800 million, on sales of $2.8 billion. And Micron has become a Wall Street favorite, as investors have driven up its stock price fivefold since last fall.AdvertisementNot bad for a company that was barely profitable as recently as three years ago. Indeed, companies like Micron and Texas Instruments have managed a remarkable American comeback in the market for memory chips. In doing so, they took advantage of a recession in Japan, American trade policy and the boom in personal computers, which more and more have a voracious appetite for memory.Today, the American memory-chip makers are thriving -- a turnaround that has left experts shaking their heads in surprise and delight."In the early 1990's, I had written off memory chips for good as a commodity business," said David B. Yoffie, a Harvard Business School professor and Intel director. "But now it's a very profitable market. It just goes to show that in fast-moving technology businesses, never say never."Besides Japan's woes and Washington's trade advocacy, the unexpected turn of events is explained by the growth and broadening of the personal computer market -- as the machines increasingly go into homes and people use them to communicate, roam the Internet and play multimedia games."We're seeing the personal computer change into something far more than just a machine for crunching numbers and writing reports," said Richard Zwetchkenbaum, an analyst at the International Data Corporation, a research firm. "And all these new uses for the PC mean a greater demand for memory."The latest new demand for computer memory is coming from Windows 95. Over the next year, millions of people are expected to buy the Microsoft Corporation's husky new operating system, with 11 million lines of code. And the new games, word processors and data base software made to run on Windows 95 are also big programs, brimming with new features and flashy graphics.With too little memory, a machine runs these fancy new programs at a crawl or crashes altogether. The memory chips, known as D-RAM's (dynamic random access memory), hold the current work on a personal computer for quick access -- as opposed to the computer's hard disk, where software programs are permanently stored.For many computer users, the decision to buy Windows 95 is soon followed by a realization that they need $200 or more in added memory. Some retailers are selling Windows 95 together with memory upgrades -- typically four megabytes, or four million bytes. (A byte is the amount of memory needed to store one character, like a letter or number.)AdvertisementThough Microsoft officials say that Windows 95 will run on a personal computer with four megabytes, they recommend eight megabytes. Most computer experts, though, say that 16 megabytes of memory is preferable if one wants to run games, search the Internet and do other things that Windows 95 is intended to make easier. Yet most desktop computers sold as recently as last Christmas came with eight megabytes, and most notebook machines had four megabytes."The surge in demand was well under way before, but Windows 95 will force more people to buy more memory," said Daniel Klesken, an analyst with Robertson, Stephens & Company in San Francisco.Just how quickly the demand for memory is increasing among PC buyers is evident at the Dell Computer Corporation. The direct-mail marketer of computers, based in Austin, Tex., makes its PC's after orders are in hand. Every machine is made to order for each customer, and its customers tend to be somewhat more experienced users than the PC market as a whole.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By the end of last year, the computers sold by Dell had an average of 10 megabytes of memory. Today, the average is 16 megabytes, up from 14 megabytes two months ago. "The demand for memory just keeps creeping up steadily," said Michael Dell, the company's chairman.To line up supplies of memory chips, Mr. Dell has just returned from a trip to Boise to meet with Micron, which is becoming an increasingly important supplier for Dell, along with Toshiba of Japan and Samsung of South Korea. "Steve Appleton and I have become friends real quickly," Mr. Dell said. "We need him and he needs us."Theft is often a reliable indicator of demand, and there seems to be a brisk illegal traffic in memory chips. On Aug. 23, for example, the campus police at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology sent a bulletin on the university's electronic-mail system to alert people of the "growing problem" of the "theft of computer memory chips."The worldwide memory-chip market is expected to grow nearly 60 percent this year, to $37.1 billion, according to Robertson, Stephens. Next year, it estimates, it will expand 35 percent more, to $50 billion.Steadily rising demand is one reason the memory-chip market is growing so much in dollar terms. Another reason is that the recession in Japan, starting in the early 1990's, forced the Japanese producers to pull back from a strategy of building more capacity to gain market share, with little or no regard for profit.When the Japanese stopped building new chip factories, the South Koreans stepped in. Still, the let-up in Japan, combined with extremely strong demand, has meant that chip prices have held steady instead of dropping 30 percent annually as they had for years before.Advertisement"Prices haven't fallen in four years," said Brian Turner, owner of Chip Merchant, a San Diego retailer. "What I'm selling for $100 now would be selling for $30 if the traditional price declines had continued."Not surprisingly, memory-chip factories are being built to try to cash in on the suddenly lucrative market. In addition to South Korea and Japan, Taiwan, Malaysia and China are all building plants.This year, 14 new factories are starting production, increasing supply of D-RAM's by 46 percent, Tom Thornhill of Montgomery Securities in San Francisco estimated.In 1996, 16 more factories are expected to begin churning out chips. Yet with demand rising 70 percent a year, most analysts predict that memory chips will continue in short supply for the next couple of years.In Boise, Micron has aggressive plans for growth. Since 1991, the company has doubled production. Next year, it intends to increase its chip-making capacity by 30 percent. Earlier this year, Micron announced that it would build a sprawling $1.3 billion chip factory in Lehi, Utah.Over the years, Micron did benefit from anti-dumping cases brought by the United States Government against Japan and South Korea, and from the 1986 semiconductor agreement with Japan to give American chip makers greater access to the Japanese market.But company strategies and economic shifts played a far greater role than Government policy. Micron, for example, has been an innovator in chip design, shrinking the size of its chips and making them easier to package for PC makers.So when the competitive assault from Japan eased, Micron was positioned to be a winner, helping double the United States' share of the market to more than 20 percent since 1991. "There's no question that the U.S. has made a comeback," Mr. Appleton said. "But we suffered for years from competing against countries instead of companies, and there's still plenty of competition out there."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on September 5, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: Sharp Rebound for U.S. Makers of Memory Chips. 
"BUILD a better mousetrap and the world will beat a path to your door." Apparently, Ralph Waldo Emerson said it much more eloquently than that, but the point is made.The same holds true for hotels, sporting venues, airports, highways, electronic gizmos and telephone systems. The world's major sports events keep beating a path to this country's door. Whether that is fair to the rest of the world is another question.Although not exactly a power in men's soccer, the United States has already been host to the 1994 World Cup. That can't be all bad, since the World Cup made Alexi Lalas a household name -- at least in the Italian city of Padua. And today Lalas and his diaspora of soccer-playing Yanks will be meeting Mexico in the United States Cup in Washington.Because of the American women's prowess in soccer, the United States seems likely to be granted the 1999 women's World Cup. And with women's soccer joining the Olympic movement next year in Atlanta, maybe that will make household names out of Captain Carla Overbeck and her talented teammates, who won the 1991 World Cup and were extremely disappointed semifinalists this past week in Sweden.AdvertisementThe International Olympic Committee seems to be camping out on the American doorstep. Maybe it was the mind-altering properties of the local manufacturer's tooth-rotting, stomach-bloating black sugar water, but the delegates have long since handed over the 1996 Summer Games to the subtle charms of Atlanta.And now the 2002 Winter Games have been given to Salt Lake City, beating out cities in Sweden, Quebec and Switzerland. The Utah city, which had been previously bypassed, will surely present a first-rate Winter Games. But this decision means the United States will have been hosts to the 1984 and 1996 Summer Games and the 1980 and 2002 Winter Games, which leaves less hope for more modest regions in smaller countries in the future. Personally, I never expect Winter Games to be as charming as the ones in Lillehammer and Hamar in 1994.But as the 1994 World Cup in the United States proved, the idea is to have enough good hotel rooms for important visitors. The host city is basically rented out as a television studio. Get used to it.The 1994 World Cup was also supposed to put soccer over the top in the United States. That did not happen, and it was unrealistic to expect it. There are plans for the long-delayed Major League Soccer to be rattling around in gigantic stadiums next spring, but in the meantime, America's Lost Generation is earning its living elsewhere.Alexi Lalas is the prototypical wandering Yank. He came to prominence last summer as the lad with the red goatee, the red hair and the flailing knees and elbows. He also demonstrated in post-game interviews and on the Charlie Rose show that his propensity for heading the ball did not damage his verbal skills.This year he became the first American to play in the top Italian league, and his team, Padova, narrowly managed to avoid relegation to the second division. Lalas started nearly every game, charmed everybody with his quips in Italian, and was given good grades for his play by the hypercritical Italian press.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."It was like a World Cup every Sunday," Lalas said the other day. "Month after month, I had to learn how to play in a league. I know I improved. I mean, I'm still the same player. I jump the same height. I run just as slowly. But I can read the game better. I learned to take everything in. I realized, 'Hey, these guys can really do this.' "Lalas plans to play next year for Padova but then hopes the United States will have a major league. The American women are also waiting for the breakthrough. Because of pressure from Title IX, the game is booming in college, but the best female players have no American league afterward. They won the first women's World Cup in 1991 in China but were beaten by Norway, 1-0, in this year's semifinals. Yesterday, they beat China, 2-0, for third place."All the teams improved," said Overbeck, the defender who also played on the 1991 champions. "We've learned how to play each other. The Norwegians kick the ball forward; they come to us. We know our opponents so well. The Norwegians are so good at disrupting our rhythm, they're so big."AdvertisementIt sounds like a good rivalry, to be continued in 1996, on the playing fields of America. And most of the American women plan to stay around."Most definitely, if they still want me," the 26-year-old Overbeck said, right after the crushing loss to Norway. "The Olympics will be a big milestone. We're making progress. We're very excited about playing in the U.S."Women's soccer, like women's volleyball, is an interesting blend of teamwork, finesse, intelligence -- and quite enough power and aggression, too. The sport could be one of the surprises at the 1996 Games. And it could lead to the 1999 women's World Cup being placed in the United States. Build a better mousetrap, and all that.But what did Emerson actually say?"A man can write a better book, preach a better sermon, or make a better mousetrap than his neighbor, though he builds his house in the woods the world will make a beaten path to his door." -- Attributed to Emerson (in a lecture) by Sarah S. B. Yule and Mary S. Keene. (Borrowings, 1889). From Bartlett's Familiar Quotations.Maybe it works for soccer, too.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 1995, on Page 8008002 of the National edition with the headline: Sports of The Times; The World Keeps Pounding on the U.S. Door. 
Robert Stokstad, a biochemical nutritionist who won renown for his research on folic acid and his work isolating vitamin K, died on Tuesday at Kaiser Permanente Hospital in Walnut Creek, Calif. He was 82 and lived in Lafayette, Calif.The cause was pneumonia, his son Robert said.Dr. Stokstad, emeritus professor of nutrition at the University of California at Berkeley, retired in 1980 but maintained an office at the university and continued to conduct research until suffering an incapacitating stroke in 1992, his son said.His research encompassed such subjects as water-soluble vitamin requirements  for chicks, antibiotics in animal nutrition, and dental nutrition.But he was perhaps best known for his 50 years of research on folic acid and  his participation in one of the two teams that raced during the early 1940's to  isolate the dietary factor responsible for pernicious anemia.AdvertisementUntil 1926, when scientists demonstrated that consumption of large quantities of raw liver was a cure, the ailment was uniformly fatal.Afterward, researchers strived to discover the curative factor in liver. One  group isolated, purified and identified vitamin B-12. Dr. Stokstad and his group, working at Lederle Laboratories, isolated and purified folic acid.Folic acid, though used only briefly as a cure for pernicious anemia, is a B  vitamin that plays a vital role in the manufacture of nucleic acids and consequently in growth and reproduction, as well as in the production of red blood cells.In the 1940's, Dr. Stokstad's research also led to the isolation of vitamin K, which is essential for the formation in the liver of substances that promote  blood clotting. Like folic acid, it is abundant in green leafy vegetables among  other foods.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dr. Stokstad, whose full name was Evan Ludvig Robert Stokstad, was born in 1913 in China, where his father was a Lutheran missionary. A few years later, the family returned to the United States, settling in Santa Rosa, Calif.Encouraged by his father, he pursued a career in science. At Berkeley, he earned a bachelor's degree in 1934 and a doctorate in animal nutrition in 1937.From 1937 until 1963, Dr. Stokstad worked as a biochemist for such companies  as Western Condensing, Golden State and Lederle.Dr. Stokstad returned to Berkeley in 1963 as a professor of nutrition and served as chairman of its department of nutritional science in 1979-80.Among the prizes he received were the Osborne and Mendel Award and the Mead-Johnson Award of the American Institute of Nutrition, as well as the Borden Award of the Poultry Science Association.In addition to his son Robert, of Berkeley, Dr. Stokstad is survived by his wife, the former Edith Grandin; another son, Paul, of Rocklin, Calif.; a brother, Christian, of Annandale, Va., and three grandchildren.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this obituary; biography appears in print on June 3, 1995, on Page 1001011 of the National edition with the headline: Robert Stokstad, 82, Biochemical Nutritionist. 
More than 250 miles out in the Indian Ocean, Capt. Kizhupalli Mohanan of the Indian Navy leaned out from an observation deck aboard the Abraham Lincoln, straining to catch a view of an F-14 Tomcat fighter as it screamed down over a cobalt-blue sea toward one of the newest nuclear-powered American aircraft carriers.For Captain Mohanan, a grizzle-bearded navy pilot with hundreds of carrier landings behind him, there was little of the first-timer's thrill in the full-throttle roar of the Tomcat's engines and the cracking impact of the 30-ton fighter hitting the deck one.But there was novelty in the experience nonetheless, for Captain Mohanan commands the Vikrant, an aging Indian aircraft carrier, and this was his introduction to the United States Navy at sea.Back on land at an Indian Navy air station at Cochin, Captain Mohanan was asked if he thought that the Indian Navy could benefit from a widening of the tentative military contacts now being taken up between the two nations after decades of estrangement.AdvertisementHis face lit up. "Oh yes," he said, standing beside a navy transport plane that ferried a group of Indian officers to the American carrier. "Indeed I do."The Vikrant commander's enthusiasm was an apt symbol of how things have moved between the two navies. More than 23 years ago the Vikrant was involved in an incident that stood for many years as a symbol of the wariness, and sometimes hostility, that characterized relations between India and the United States for much of the last 50 years.In December 1971, when Indian forces entered what was then East Pakistan to seal the victory of the rebels fighting to create Bangladesh, President Nixon sent a naval battle group led by the aircraft carrier Enterprise into the Bay of Bengal. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi interpreted the deployment as a military threat; the Vikrant, patrolling farther north, was placed on battle stations.The Enterprise sailed away. But among Indians, the incident has stood as an emblem of the United States' readiness to assert itself militarily in what many Indians regard as their backyard -- and as a marker of Washington's unwillingness to accept India for what it believes itself to be: a regional superpower with wide-ranging military interests."Of course, the Enterprise could have sunk the Vikrant in 20 minutes," said Jasjit Singh, a retired Indian fighter pilot who is director of the Institute for Defense Studies and Analyses, in New Delhi. "But, for us, that was never the point."What was, Mr. Singh said, was that the United States had tried to dictate terms to New Delhi on the creation of Bangladesh, an issue of crucial strategic importance to India.Now planners in Washington and New Delhi say the time has come to start developing the closer military ties that many on both sides hoped might develop after India gained independence in 1947. Partly, the changes have been made possible by the collapse of the Soviet Union, which was India's closest ally, and its principal source of military hardware.Russia remains a major military supplier; in one of several recent arms purchases, the Indian Air Force bought two additional squadrons of MIG-29 fighters, at a cost of more than $2 billion. But because American policy in the region is no longer aimed at containing Soviet power, the nexus that made Pakistan a fulcrum of American military policy for decades has been broken.AdvertisementIn turn, Washington and New Delhi have been freed to seek a new military relationship that is no longer hostage at every turn to American ties with Pakistan.Equally important, India is now in its fifth year of economic reforms that have featured moves toward dismantling the socialist economy built in the 1950's, when Soviet influence in India was rapidly gaining, and toward market principles.Although total foreign investments have been modest so far compared with elsewhere in Asia, American companies have led the way, creating a momentum that has energized relations across the board.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new military relationship was on show recently at both ends of India, in the visit of the Indian officers to the Abraham Lincoln, and in ceremonies in New Delhi organized by the United States to commemorate the last time Indian and United States forces worked closely together, in World War II.The New Delhi ceremonies focused on veterans of the India-China air bridge across the Himalayas, known among American fliers as the Hump, that kept American and Chinese forces in China supplied from 1942 to 1945.During their four hours aboard the Abraham Lincoln, a group of Indian officers had lunch with Rear Adm. Jay B. Yakely, commander of a carrier battle group comprising four surface ships and a submarine that sailed from San Francisco in April for a six-month deployment in the Persian Gulf.Afterward, the Indian officers, including Rear Adm. John C. DeSilva, commander of India's western fleet based in Bombay, toured the hangar deck, watched flight operations and fanned out to discuss technical issues with American officers.When Admiral DeSilva was asked if the presence of an American aircraft carrier off the Indian coast raised uncomfortable memories for India, he said: "We meet here as fellow sailors, as members of the brotherhood of the white uniform. The ocean is our street, and we are like neighbors. When we meet, we like to shake hands."Admiral Yakely, a veteran carrier pilot who served on the military staff in the White House under Presidents Bush and Clinton, was equally circumspect, although he did say that having aboard Indian naval fliers -- several of whom trained in the Soviet Union -- was a measure of how the world had changed.Advertisement"I spent 20 years of my life preparing for the possibility of a war with the Soviet Union," he said. "My job was to keep their Bears and their Badgers as far away from our carriers as I could. Now, it's a different world."On a visit to India in January, Defense Secretary William J. Perry signed an agreement that set a framework for expanded military contacts, including joint naval exercises, training exchanges and high-level consultations on military and security issues.For now, the two Governments seem eager not to rush the pace; although the Perry visit emphasized areas in which the two countries can cooperate on military matters, major political obstacles remain.Among these are the tense relations between India and Pakistan, and differences between Washington and New Delhi on nuclear weapons. India shunned the recent United Nations meeting that renewed the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons, and has rejected American proposals that would cap the secret nuclear weapons programs of both India and Pakistan.But looking to the future, many Indians say they believe that the United States has crossed a crucial threshold that could herald much wider military cooperation.In his New Delhi office, Mr. Singh offers visitors photocopies of a speech Mr. Perry made to the Foreign Policy Association in New York after his India visit, with heavy underlining in the section where the Defense Secretary said, "India wants to retain its nuclear capability to deter the Chinese military, which is superior to India both in nuclear and conventional capability."To some Indian military experts, Mr. Perry's words suggested that the limited military contacts could give way, as China's military might grows, to something much broader, possibly even to having Washington encourage Indian military growth as a counterbalance to China."The United States is going to have to look very carefully at where its long-term interests lie," Mr. Singh said. "And when they do, they'll find that it doesn't make any sense to deal with us any longer as though we were a boy in short pants."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 1995, on Page 1001012 of the National edition with the headline: After Decades of Wariness, Forces of U.S. and India Begin to Cooperate. 
Texas Instruments is designing some of its more sophisticated computer chips in India. Motorola Inc. recently set up computer-programming and equipment-design centers in China, India, Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Australia, and it is looking for a site in South America.And while big American banks already process some account statements overseas, large accounting firms and insurance companies are looking at ways to prepare American tax returns and handle American insurance claims in East Asia.The day may yet arrive when millions of Americans will desert their offices for laptops in exotic lands. But corporate America has already made half of that vision a reality, many economists say. It is getting a lot of work done on foreign shores -- but not by Americans. Instead, corporations are paying educated locals to do the same chores for a fraction of the cost.The new tools of the information age were supposed to help the United States regain an edge in international competition. And while that has happened in many advanced-technology industries, the combination of powerful personal computers and high-capacity undersea telephone cables is also subjecting millions of white-collar Americans to the same global wage pressures that their blue-collar counterparts have long faced. As with steel and garment workers, the white-collar workers' positions and salaries increasingly depend on whether they can justify their higher pay with higher productivity.AdvertisementThe transfer of semi-skilled jobs overseas is hardly new. American companies have long assembled computer circuit boards in Malaysia, for example, and Western financial-services concerns have done processing work in Singapore.But consulting firms say the shift is taking place at an accelerating rate and involves ever-higher-paying jobs. Constant improvements in computers and communications, particularly modems, have made it easier and cheaper to move large quantities of computer data, even for complex engineering designs. And foreign workers are designing more advanced products, like chips for complex graphic and multimedia applications."There's a really strong parallel to the 1960's and 1970's, when U.S. manufacturers sent everything offshore," said Thomas G. Watrous, the managing partner of the Andersen Consulting office in Manila. "The difference is it's being done electronically."Such moves can mean real pain for some Americans. When Sea-Land Services Inc. asked Jessie B. Lindsay, a longtime computer programmer for the company, to sign form letters to Congress last winter supporting legislation to protect American shipping jobs from foreign competition, she loyally agreed.But a week later, Sea-Land, a unit of the CSX Corporation, announced that it was shutting down her division in Elizabeth, N.J., laying off most of the 325 employees and subcontracting the work to programmers in India and the Philippines. Mrs. Lindsay was offered a job at least temporarily in Charlotte, N.C., to make sure the transition went smoothly, but quit because she had a baby and was reluctant to move."I felt betrayed," Mrs. Lindsay said. Her family faced that situation twice last winter. Her husband, William F. Lindsay, also left his programming job at the American International Group when it, a large insurance company, brought programmers from India to his office and began training them to replace the American workers.Many fear that the growing tendency of corporations to farm out tasks to developing countries is widening the gap even further between the rich and everybody else in American society by eliminating some categories of high-skill, high-wage jobs that make up the heart of the middle class. But the temptation to use cheap foreign labor is too great for companies that are desperate to stay competitive in an increasingly global marketplace.India is fertile ground for these companies because it inherited a strong English-language school system from the days of British rule, and has emphasized mathematical education since then. Yet computer scientists trained at Indian universities come relatively cheap. Experienced programmers command salaries of $1,200 to $1,500 a month, compared with $4,000 to $6,000, or even $10,000 for stars, in the United States. The result has been explosive growth in the number of Indians working on computer programs, mainly for the American market, to nearly 75,000 today from several thousand in the early 1980's.AdvertisementNew jobs overseas do not necessarily mean the elimination of jobs in the United States, of course. Indeed, while Sea-Land laid off many of its programmers, Motorola and Texas Instruments are expanding in the United States as well as abroad and attribute their overseas moves in part to a scarcity of good engineers in the United States."Software applications are growing so quickly that we're nowhere near a finite number of jobs to be parceled out around the globe," Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said in an interview.Some of the best-paid computer jobs in the United States require writing original programs for a customer's precise needs, and these jobs tend to be staying, experts said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But rapidly evolving computer technologies are turning skilled tasks into routine work that can easily be shipped overseas. Mainframe computing jobs like Mrs. Lindsay's are particularly vulnerable because many companies are changing over to networks of desktop computers, and many Asian programmers specialize in adapting software to run on different computers.All of this keeps the pressure on the United States to maintain its technological edge over the rest of the world.Mr. Reich contends that many high-technology jobs will inevitably remain in the United States because electronic mail and facsimile machines are no substitute for working side by side with customers and colleagues. "It's the rubbing of shoulders, the cup of coffee over a lunch counter, where the spark of innovation occurs," he said.Still, for many tasks, companies like Sea-Land say they must spread their work to lower-cost countries to stay competitive. "Any service like this we would shop on a worldwide basis," said M. Clint Eisenhauer, a spokesman for Sea-Land.The exodus of white-collar jobs to developing countries troubles some economists. Even those who dismissed the warnings of politicians like Ross Perot and Patrick J. Buchanan that dismantling North American trade barriers would lead to a flight of blue-collar jobs to Mexico say the danger is all too real for skilled labor.These economists argue that companies will often want to keep their factories in the United States to be close to good roads and railways that can supply their raw materials and deliver their goods to market. But, they add, the growing part of the economy based on ideas and information does not always need such physical proximity.AdvertisementProf. Jagdish Bhagwati of Columbia University, a critic of the notion that freer trade jeopardizes unskilled labor, for example, takes a different stance when it comes to skilled workers, particularly in the computer industry. "You're definitely seeing an enormous integration of the markets, and therefore a drag on the real wages here of the semi-skilled, of the computer programmers, of the skilled," he said.Texas Instruments, for example, does not have to worry about infrastructure for its computer-chip-designing operation in Bangalore, India. All it needs is a private satellite link. The system works so well that the company has announced plans to expand the Bangalore office by 40 percent, to 350 workers.Rick Younts, the executive vice president for international operations at Motorola, said it was not just lower wages that made Asian sites so attractive. Engineers in the United States can work on a project during the day, then send it electronically for more work in Asia while they sleep. As a result, projects can be completed in up to 40 percent less time, said S Remadorai, the deputy chief operating officer of Tata Consulting Services in Bombay.Until recently, many such companies were reluctant to hire foreigners. "The arrogance that we used to have, that nobody could be as good as we were, except maybe a European, is all going away now," said Edith Holloman, the Washington representative of the American Engineering Association, a trade group based in Fort Worth.To be sure, skilled American workers maintain many advantages over their foreign counterparts and also benefit from the upgrading abroad through increased demand for their own output.For now, though, the increased foreign competition has set off a political backlash in the United States. The Software Professionals' Political Action Committee, a lobbying group in Austin, Tex., wants to limit immigration visas for computer programmers. Sea-Land, American International and other companies have brought foreign workers into the United States temporarily under such visas for training, before sending them back to do their jobs in their home countries.But the overall direction of American immigration policy in recent years has been to encourage skilled workers to come to the United States and discourage unskilled workers.And even if policy makers wanted to, it might well be impossible to build walls around the country. Clearly, Professor Bhagwati said, American companies will go wherever they can find the best deals. "This is relentless," he said.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 28, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: SKILLED WORKERS WATCH THEIR JOBS MIGRATE OVERSEAS. 
ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey  Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts, through the end of the year. The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music. Show time, 8 P.M. Admission: $4; $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.GLASSBORO CENTER FOR THE ARTS Los Pleneros de la 21 performs traditional music of Puerto Rico. Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $11-$16. Contemporary jazz by Fourplay. Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $14.50-$23.50. Wilson Recital Hall, Rowan  College, Glassboro. (609) 256-4545.LAKE VALHALLA CLUB The New Jersey Jazz Society presents "A Tribute to Louis Armstrong," by Joe Muranyi's Valhalla Vikings, featuring Joe Muranyi, clarinet,  and Marty Napoleon, piano, both former members of the All-Stars, Armstrong's touring band. Next Sunday at 1 P.M. Tickets: $22. 8 Vista Road, Montville. (201) 543-2039.MAXWELL'S Mike Peters (of the Alarm) and Hank. Tonight at 9. Tickets: $6. American Standard, Floor Jack, and the Heartdrops. Thursday at 9 P.M. Tickets: $6. Jonathan Richman and Julia Greenberg. Friday at 10 P.M. Tickets: $10. Jonathan Richman and J. C. Hopkins and the Prodigals. Saturday at 10 P.M. Tickets: $10. 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken. (201) 798-4064.AdvertisementMONMOUTH UNIVERSITY Andre-Michel Shub, pianist, and Cho-Liang Lin, violinist, give an all-Beethoven recital. Today at 3 P.M. Tickets: $22; $20 for the elderly. Pollack Auditorium, Larchwood Avenue, West Long Branch. (908) 571-3483.NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS The Arbor Chamber Music Societypresents the second concert in its series "A Season of Angels and Devils," featuring the Brentano String Quartet playing works by Wagner, Elgar, Tartini and Brahms. Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $17; $14 for the elderly; $7 for students. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 232-1116.NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Masterworks series, conducted by Zdenek Macal, with Benita Valente, soprano, featuring works by Gorecki and Beethoven. Today at 3 P.M. at Symphony Hall, Newark. Tickets: $12-$44. "The World's Greatest Storytellers," conducted by Mariusz Smolij, with Tamara Hayden, soprano, featuring the music of Andrew Lloyd Webber and John Williams. Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the State Theater, New Brunswick. Thursday at 8 P.M. at the John Harms Center, Englewood. Friday at 8:30 P.M. at the Count Basie Theater, Red Bank. Next Sunday at 3 P.M. at Symphony Hall, Newark. Tickets: $23-$42. (800) ALLEGRO or (201) 624-8203.NEWARK JAZZ FESTIVAL The 10-day festival returns to Newark for its fifth year, featuring more than 175 artists in 21 events. Today at 3 P.M.: Keith Marks and Company; Dee Dee Bridgewater, vocals; Arturo Sandoval, trumpet; and the McCoy Tyner Trio featuring Michael Brecker. Friday at 8 P.M.: Edgardo Cintron and Tiempo Noventa, percussion; Allan Harris, vocals; Tania Maria Quartet, and Ahmad Jamal Trio. Saturday at 7 P.M.: Rudy Walker and the ATG Ensemble; Gloria-Lynne,  vocals; Jon Lucien, vocals and guitar, and Stanley Turrentine, saxophone. Next Sunday at 3 P.M.: the All Star Jazz Organ Jam Spectacular. Tickets: $25-$35. Robert Treat Hotel, Tri-State Ballroom, 50 Park Place, Newark. (201) 507-8900. Free events include "In the Tradition: Jazz Singers," featuring Giacomo Gates on Monday; Tess Marsalis on Tuesday, and Karen Lopes on Wednesday at 6:30 P.M., WBGO Studio, 54 Park Place, Newark. (201) 624-8880. "Jersey Jazz Masters," featuring the Newark Jazz Orchestra, directed by Joe Thomas, Wednesday at 6 P.M. Terrace Room, Symphony Hall, 1020 Broad Street, Newark. Free. (201) 643-4550. "Jazz Drums at the Library," a series of concerts and lecture demonstrations, featuring the traditional jazz of Eddie Gladden on Tuesday; the Dixieland of Lou Grassi on Wednesday; and the contemporary jazz of Gregory Searvance on Thursday. Noon at Centennial Hall, the Newark Public Library, 5 Washington Street, Newark. Free. (201) 733-7793. Robert Treat Hotel, Newark. Free.PASSAIC PUBLIC LIBRARY The Second Sunday Series continues with the classical piano interpretations of Diane Battersby. Today at 3 P.M. Julius Forstmann Library, 195 Gregory Avenue, Passaic. Free. (201) 779-0474.STOCKTON STATE COLLEGE The Stockton Performing Arts Center presents the second concert of the Bridgeton Symphony Masterworks Series, featuring Anna Helleur, violinist, playing works by Mozart, Saint-Saens and Schumann. Next Sunday at 4 P.M. Tickets: $15-$20. Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4786.TEANECK PUBLIC LIBRARY The All Seasons Chamber Players presents "The B Team," a  program of works by Blavet, Bloch, Britten and Brahms. Next Sunday at 3 P.M. Free. Teaneck Public Library, 840 Teaneck Road, Teaneck. (201) 837-4171.UNITARIAN CHURCH, SUMMIT The Afternoon Music series opens with "A Double Quartet," featuring selections by Laderman and Mendelssohn, presented by the Colorado String Quartet and the Cassatt String Quartet. Today at 4 P.M. 4 Waldron Avenue, Summit. Tickets: $15; $12 for the elderly; $5 for students. (908) 273-3245.AdvertisementATTIC ENSEMBLE "Little Shop of Horrors." Today at 3 P.M. Tickets: $12; $10 for students and the elderly. 326 Union Street, Jersey City. (201) 217-2624.BERGEN COMMUNITY COLLEGE "Love Letters," by A. R.  Gurney, starring Wesley Addy  and Celeste Holm, to benefit the American Stage Company. Saturday at 8 P.M. Bergen Community College Theater, 400 Paramus Road, Paramus. A post-performance  reception will be held in the Mercedes atrium showroom of Prestige Motors, Route 17, Paramus. Tickets: $100. (201) 692-7720. BLACK RIVER PLAYHOUSE The Chester Theater Group presents "Dancing at Lughnasa,"  Brian Friel's tale of five unmarried sisters in the village of Ballybeg, Ireland. Saturday at 8 P.M. Grove Street, Chester. Tickets: $12; $11 for students and the elderly. (908) 879-7304.CENTENARY PERFORMING ARTS GUILD The New Jersey Ballet performs a selection of classical and contemporary works, including "Valse Fantaisie" and "Who Cares?" Tonight at 7. Little Theater, 400 Jefferson Street, Hackettstown. Tickets: $15;  $10, children under 12. (908) 979-0900.CIRCLE PLAYHOUSE The Circle Players present "Death and the Maiden." Today at 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. Through Nov. 25. Tickets: $11. 416 Victoria Avenue, Piscataway. (908) 968-7555.CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY "The Piano Lesson," by August Wilson. Today at 3 P.M. Tickets: $25-$32. 7 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 249-5560.FORUM THEATER GROUP "The Sisters Rosensweig,' by Wendy Wasserstein. Today at 2:30 P.M. Tickets: $23-$27. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (908) 548-4670. GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE "Love Comics," by Sarah Schlesinger and David Evans. Today at 2 and 7 P.M., Tuesday through Saturday at 8 P.M., and next Sunday at 7  P.M. Through Nov. 19. Tickets: $22-$32. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7717.HILLCREST COMMUNITY CENTER The West Milford Players present "Arsenic and Old Lace," by Joseph Kesselring. Today at 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. 1810 Macopin Road, West Milford. Tickets: $10; $8 for students and the elderly. (201) 728-0027.LUNA STAGE "The Man in Room 304," written and performed by Craig Alan Edwards. Thursday through Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M. Through Nov. 26. Tickets: $10-$20. 6 Erie Street, Montclair. (201) 744-3309.AdvertisementMcCARTER THEATER "Valley Song," written and directed by Athol Fugard. Today at 2 P.M. Tickets: $24-$32. The National Ballet of China presents "Giselle: Act II" and "The Red Detachment of Women." Monday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $28-$32. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.MERCER COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Players Theater at Kelsey presents "Short Shorts I," selections from five plays, including "Pillow Talk," "The Chain" and  "I've Been Loving You Too Long," directed by Terry Sherman. Today at 4 P.M. Kelsey Theater, 1200 Old Trenton Road, West Windsor. Tickets: $5; $3 for students and the elderly. (609) 584-9444.PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "Dreamgirls," a musical about a singing group's rise to stardom and its manipulative manager. Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M. Through Dec. 10. Tickets: $31-$46. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.PLAYHOUSE ASSOCIATION OF SUMMIT "Beau Jest," by James Sherman. Today at 2 P.M. Friday and Saturday at 8:15 P.M. Tickets: $10. 10 New England Avenue, Summit. (201) 701-0963.RITZ THEATER "Gypsy." Today at 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $12-$14. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609) 858-5230.STUDIO PLAYERS "The Philadelphia Story," by Philip Barry, a comedy about a spoiled, divorced socialite's plans to remarry. Today at 5 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $10-$12. 14 Alvin Place, Upper Montclair. (201) 744-9752. ALLEN SHEPPARD GALLERY "Pastels and Paintings," by James P. Kimak. Through next  Sunday. Friday and Saturday, 1 to 11 P.M., and Thursday and Sunday, 1 to 7:30 P.M. Piermont Landing, Piermont, N.Y. (914) 365-1458.ART MUSEUM OF PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Anatomy of a Painting: The Road to Calvary,  by Herri met de Bles," an exhibition on a Northern Renaissance painting of the "world landscape" style, in which a religious scene is shown before a panoramic  landcape. Through Nov. 26. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. The campus of Princeton University. Free. (609) 258-3788.BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Kenneth Licht: 10 Years of Art Boxes" displays 85 boxes filled with collages and collections of objects. "Elio Beltran: Recent  Paintings" focuses on life in Cuba. Through next Sunday. Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.AdvertisementESSEX FINE ARTS GALLERY "The Lithographs and Etchings of Oldrich Kulhanek." Through Nov. 22. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. 13 South Fullerton Avenue, Montclair. (201) 783-8666. FAIRLEIGH DICKINSON UNIVERSITY "100 Years of the American Comic Strip: The Comics as a Mirror of Society" showcases five aspects of society: the family, social class, heroes, politics and the role of women. Through Dec. 8. Monday through Thursday, 8:30 A.M. to 11 P.M.; Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 2 to 10 P.M. Florham-Madison Library on the Madison campus. (201) 593-8515.GALLERY AT BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB "Hughie Lee-Smith: An Overview, 1949-1995." Through Nov. 26. Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Route 206, Princeton. (609) 252-6275.GROUNDS FOR SCULPTURE "Three Sculptors and Their Drawings" displays works by Lawrence Fane, Niki Ketchman and John Monti. Through Feb. 29. Friday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 18 Fairground Road, Hamilton. (609) 586-0616.HUNTERDON ART CENTER "Michael Burke: Reliquaries" features aluminum sculpture, wall relief collages, prints, books and poetry. Through Dec. 3. Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415. JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Jersey City Public Schools Permanent Student Art Collection," the work of students from kindergarten through the 12th grade. Wednesday through Nov. 30. Free. Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City.  (201) 547-4514.KENT PLACE GALLERY "Understanding Our Neighbors," photographs by Helen Stummer depicting the human spirit in a deteriorating city neighborhood. Through Dec. 15. Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 4 P.M. 42 Norwood Avenue, Summit. (908) 273-0900.LENA DI GANGI ART GALLERY Photographs of rock musicians by Bob Leafe. Through Nov. 30. 744 McBride Avenue, West Paterson. (201) 345-1210.MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Proud Heritage," outstanding works given to the museum over its 81-year history. Through Jan. 14. "Varied Visions: The Native American  at the Turn of the Century," contrasting perspectives on American Indian life as depicted in art. Through Jan. 21. "Empty Dress: Clothing as Surrogate in Recent  Art." Through Dec. 31. Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Admission: $4; $3 for students with ID and the elderly. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.MORRIS COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "A Bouquet of Brides" displays more than a dozen wedding gowns dating to 1750 and reflecting a variety of styles and histories. Through Jan. 4. Admission: $3. Thursday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 1:30 to 4 P.M. 68 Morris Avenue, Morristown. (201) 267-3465.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MORRIS MUSEUM "Traditions in Elegance: 100 Teapots From the Norwich Castle Museum," early 18th- to late 19th-century examples from the Twining Teapot Gallery in England. Through March 17. "Japonica Magnifica," paintings and drawings of Japanese flowers and plants by Raymond Booth, artist and horticulturist. Through Nov. 20. Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Admission: $4; $2 for students and the elderly. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.AdvertisementNEWARK MUSEUM "Cooking for the Gods: The Art of Home Ritual in Bengal." Through  June 30. "Astronauts: The Star Travelers," photographs of the Apollo XI flight.  Through Dec. 31. "Explore Korea: A Visit to Grandfather's House." Through Jan. 5. "Artistry in Silver 1995: the Society of American Silversmiths," a juried exhibition. Through Feb. 4. Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New Jersey." Through April 26. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230 Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Protecting the Pinelands Through Art: Botanical Illustrations by Robin A. Jess." Through Dec. 31. "Sign of the Times: 100 Years  of Advertising by the R. C. Maxwell Company." Through Jan. 21. "Baskets and Brooms: Delaware Adaptation to European Contact," wood splint baskets made by the Delaware Indians from the 18th to the early 20th century. Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.NOYES MUSEUM "From Object to Subject: Constructions and Collages by L. A. D. Montgomery." Through Dec. 19. Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. Admission: $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents; free on Fridays. Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.OCEAN COUNTY COLLEGE FINE ARTS CENTER GALLERY Wood carvings by Marion Erickson.  Through Jan. 15. Monday through Thursday, 8 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Friday, 10 A.M.. to 3 P.M.; and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. Free. College Drive, Toms River. (908) 255-0340.PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE "Three Puerto Rican Artists," works by Lorenzo  Homar, Evelyn Lopez and Elaine Soto in observance of Puerto Rican Heritage Month. Through Nov. 29. Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Broadway and LRC Galleries, One College Boulevard, Paterson. (201) 684-6555.PETERS VALLEY CRAFT CENTER "Artists in Residence," featuring works in wood, fiber, ceramics, fine metals, blacksmithing metals and photography. Through Dec. 31. Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to  9 P.M. 19 Kuhn Road, Route 615, Layton. (201) 948-5200.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY, FIRESTONE LIBRARY "Collector's Choice: Victorian Bookmarks From the Collection of Lois Densky-Wolff," "Telling Her Story: British Women of  Letters of the Victorian Era," and "Instruction With Delight: The Victorian World of Optical Toys." Through Jan. 7. Monday through Friday, 8:45 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 1 Washington Road, Princeton. (609) 258-6345.AdvertisementRIDGE AND VALLEY CENTER The Ridge and Valley Conservancy presents "Bears and Other Neighbors," a show of photographs. Saturday, 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. Through Nov. 25. 16 Main Street, Blairstown. (908) 362-8760.RUTGERS UNIVERSITY-NEWARK "Red Tape From Red Square," a cinema and art festival  focusing on Russian critiques of bureaucracy. "Bureaucracy in Russian Art: Posters and Political Cartoons," 120 satirical works on display. Through Dec. 1. "Battling Bureaucracy," Russian films and editorial cartoons, many of which have never been distributed commercially. Thursday and Nov. 20 at 1 P.M. Monday through Thursday, 8 A.M. to midnight; Friday, 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 10 P.M. Dana Library, 185 University Avenue, Newark. (201) 648-5262.SCHERER GALLERY "Latin America, as Seen by Rufino Tamayo" depicts human interactions and emotions through the artist's etchings and drawings. Through today. "Hundertwasser," etchings by the Austrian artist. Saturday through Dec. 3. Wednesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 93 School Road West, Marlboro. (908) 536-9465.STEAMROLLER GALLERY New encaustic paintings by Val Sivilli and new sculptures by Parran Collery. Through Nov. 26. Friday and Saturday, noon to 9 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 6 P.M. 52 Bridge Street, Frenchtown. (908) 996-7279.SWAIN GALLERIES "Equestrian Scenes," by S. Allyn Schaeffer. Through Dec. 1. Monday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908) 756-1707.WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER "Imaging New Jersey," from the Printmaking Council of New Jersey. Through Thursday. Paintings by Muriel Harris. Through Nov. 30. Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. Watchung Circle, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM "Visions of the  Modern Japanese Woman: Shiseido Cosmetics, 1872-1995," a selection of illustrations, photographs and package designs by the Shiseido Company since the end of the 19th century. Through Jan. 28. "From Gulag to Glasnost: Nonconformist Art From the Soviet Union," drawn from the Norton and Nancy Dodge Collection, more than 12,000 works of art documenting Soviet dissident art from 1956 to 1988. Through March 3. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Rutgers University, George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Thumbelina," the musical adventure by Hans Christian Andersen. Saturday at 1 and 4 P.M. Tickets: $10. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.AdvertisementLIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER Visitors have their choice of two films that will take them on a journey into the far reaches of outer space or to the murky depths of  the sea. "Destiny in Space," narrated by Leonard Nimoy, gives viewers a look outside the Earth with film from nine space shuttle missions. Daily, noon and 2  P.M. "The Living Sea," narrated by Meryl Streep, with original music by Sting, sends you into an underwater world with exotic sea creatures. Daily, 10 and 11 A.M. and 1, 3 and 4 P.M. Admission: $7 for adults; $6 for students and the elderly; $5 for children under 12. 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.NEWARK MUSEUM The Dreyfuss Planetarium presents "Mother Earth/Father Sky," American Indian stories about the creation of the universe and the motion of the Sun, the Moon and the stars, and "Galaxies," by Tony Ferris, a journey through outer space to far-reaching solar systems. Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M. Through Nov. 26. Admission: $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.PEDDIE SCHOOL The Youth Theater Series continues with "Story Salad IX." Saturday at 2 P.M. Tickets: $8. South Main Street, Hights town. (609) 490-7550.RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE "The Secret of the Cardboard Rocket," a planetarium show created to encourage the use of libraries, enhance language skills and develop imagination. Today at 3 P.M. and Saturday at 1:30 and 3 P.M.  Tickets: $4.50. Route 28 and Lamington Road, North Branch. (908) 231-8805.WATCHUNG PUBLIC LIBRARY The Bali Java Dance Theater and Music for Homemade Instruments perform "The Ramayana," an epic Indonesian tale, featuring masks and dancing. Wednesday at 4 P.M. Free; registration required.ART MUSEUM OF PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Archeological Discoveries in the Middle East From the Roman Period," a talk by Alison Shehadi, who will trace the influences  of Roman art on Middle Eastern civilizations, especially Syria and Egypt, using  the Princeton University expeditions of 1904-5 and 1909 as her source. Today at  3 P.M. "Objects of Myths and Celebration in Peruvian and African Art," a discussion by Lore Lindenfeld. Friday at 12:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M. Free. 101 McCormick Hall, Princeton University. (609) 258-3788.COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY ALUMNI CLUB OF BERGEN AND PASSAIC COUNTIES "The Birth Pangs  of Democracy," a lecture by Dr. Bela Kiraly, a soldier, teacher, author and politician who led troops in the 1956 uprising in Hungary and escaped to the United States, where he became a professor of history at Brooklyn College. Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $15. Radisson Hotel, 401 South Van Brunt Street, Englewood. ENGLEWOOD LIBRARY "Scott Joplin: His Life and Music," a lecture by Isobel Wilcox. Wednesday at 8 P.M. Free. 31 East Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.FAIR LAWN PUBLIC LIBRARY "Violence and Love: Myth and Complex Revisited," stories of gods and mortals in Greek mythology, sponsored by the New Jersey Center for Modern Pschoanalysis. Free. Today, 1 to 5 P.M. 10-01 Fair Lawn Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 794-1222.AdvertisementHOLY NAME HOSPITAL The Great American Smokeout Day Program, a two-hour seminar introducing a stress-free approach to quitting smoking. Wednesday from 7:30 to 9:30 P.M. Fee: $45; registration required. Adult Day Away Center, Community Health Services Building, 725 Teaneck Road, Teaneck. (201) 833-3186.JERSEY CITY STATE COLLEGE "How to Finance Your College or Graduate Education," a discussion by Karen DeAngelis, director of the Jersey City State College Women's Center. Monday at 4 P.M. The Women's Center, 32 College Steet, Jersey City. "Domestic Violence: Could It Be You Next?" a talk by Mary Murphy, social worker and director of Project Start. Tuesday at noon. Free; registration required. Formal Lounge (Room 217), Michael Gilligan Student Union Building, 2039 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City. (201) 200-3189.JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER OF METROPOLITAN NEW JERSEY "Jews, Politics and the Moral High Ground," a series of political debates. "Is Hollywood's View of American Society and Family Values a Jewish Concern?" Wednesday at 8 P.M. 760 Northfield  Avenue, West Orange. (201) 736-3200. "American Jews and the Christian Right: Necessary Allies or Inevitable Adveraries?" Dec. 6 at 8 P.M. "The Relevance of the Christian Coalition to the Jewish Politic," Dec. 13 at 8 P.M. 901 Route 10 East, Whippany. (201) 428-9300, extension 400. Tickets: $26 and $24.RAMAPO COLLEGE OF NEW JERSEY The Fall Master Lecture Series presents "Clash of Civilizations or Global Village? The United Nations and a Changing World," a weekly lecture and discussion. Wednesdays, 9 A.M. to 10:40 A.M. Through Dec. 13. Free. Student Center, 219. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 529-7602.SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER "We Who Laugh, Last," a discussion by Dorothy L. Zufall  on health, humor and coping skills. Thursday at 10 A.M. Free. 110 Rehill Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2827.WILLIAM PATERSON COLLEGE The Art at Lunch series continues with David Shapiro, professor of art, giving the last of three lectures on Asian art. Thursday at 11:30 A.M. Admission: $3. Ben Shahn Galleries, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (201) 595-2371.WOMEN'S RIGHTS INFORMATION CENTER "New Directions," a 20-hour series of career decision-making classes for women, continues Monday through Friday, 9 to 11:30 A.M. Women's Center Building, 108 West Palisade Avenue, Englewood. Registration: (201) 568-1166.ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM "Innovations in Beauty: Shiseido's History and Marketing Strategies, 1872 to Present," presented by Yutaka Goto, manager of international public relations, Shiseido Company. Thursday at 6:30 P.M. George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237. GREATER NEW JERSEY SUNDAY STAMP EXPO Today, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Holiday Inn, Route 22 (westbound), Springfield. (201) 379-3779. MURDER TO GO "Killing Mr. Withers," an Alfred Hitchcock-style comic mystery thriller set in the 1950's. Saturdays, 8 P.M. Through Dec. 30. Woodbridge Sheraton, Woodbridge. The $42 ticket includes a four-course meal. (201) 301-0562.NATURE TRAIL WALK AT THE GREAT SWAMP The Morris County Park System sponsors a free hike led by naturalists from the Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center. Today at 1 P.M. 247 Southern Boulevard, Chatham Township. (201) 635-6629. PAPERMAKING WORKSHOPS Two-hour workshops explore the process of making hand-crafted paper. For children and accompanying family members, today at noon; for adults, today at 2 P.M. Fee: $15 for materials; registration required. Rutgers University, George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this list appears in print on November 12, 1995, on Page NJ13 of the National edition with the headline: ON THE TOWNS. 
You discover things about life out here in your first season running an old Victorian inn on a windswept speck of tidal moors and bluffs. Sheets, for example. Brad and Anne Marthens can tell you a lot about sheets.It was their first week in business in late April when the Marthenses discovered that the innkeeping guidebooks were wrong about linens. On Block Island, because of the vicissitudes of the ferry schedule -- and the fact that the nearest commercial laundry is on the mainland -- an inn needs three full sets of linen, not two. Dirty sheets go out on the 12:30 P.M. ferry to Point Judith, R.I., and they do not come back until the 9 A.M. boat the next day, at the earliest."We needed a lot more," Mrs. Marthens said with a sigh. "Of all the things we didn't realize."Mrs. Marthens's words provide an apt coda for the couple's first year as innkeepers. The things they didn't realize, for better and worse, have formed the texture of their lives since they came to this island, nearly two hours by ferry off the tip of Montauk, L.I., last fall.They had never run an inn before or lived on an island, but here they dived in head first, life savings and all, pursuing their dream in a 116-year-old, 21-room hilltop retreat called the Atlantic Inn, leaving friends, jobs, routines and familiarity all behind them.AdvertisementThey have not found paradise or perfection. Life here, they said, has been confusing and invariably challenging. But unlike the thousands of people who only dream of tossing aside the workaday world, the Marthenses have done it.The saga began last September, when they signed papers selling their home in Cheshire, Conn. Leaving their lawyer's office, the Marthenses drove directly to the ferry, their car loaded with what they could carry.The rest of their belongings, which followed later, could not fit in their small upstairs managers' apartment, so it has been scattered through various rooms of the inn or put into storage.Through the winter, with the inn closed and empty, the couple painted, changed fixtures and doorknobs and made lists. Now, in late summer, they race to keep up with the seasonal crush, gratified that the inn is full most nights, but staggered by the burden as well.Like one long shakedown cruise, they said, the year is ending as it began: complicated, noisy, chaotic, at times profoundly moving, but always new. They keep a stack of letters perhaps six inches high from strangers all over the country who wrote to wish them good luck and courage after the Marthenses' story was told in an article in The New York Times last fall."We certainly have questioned ourselves many times, saying, 'What have we done?' " said Mr. Marthens, a 35-year-old former advertising executive for Times Mirror cable television.. "But I can honestly say we've never been happier. I'm convinced we made the right decision, even though it has not been an easy road."Some moments, the Marthenses said, will be etched in their minds forever. They both speak of the day last spring, about a month before opening day, when the dining room was still a mess of dust and dirt and uninstalled carpet. Out of nowhere, their chef and first employee, Lawrence Busteed, announced that dinner would be served. He spread a white tablecloth and put out the good china, and they all sat down together in the silent, empty, dirty inn and dined."Sometimes they get to a point where they just don't know what to do," said Mr. Busteed, who grew up in an innkeeping family (his parents once managed the Atlantic Inn) and knows the business's inherent anxieties well. Mr. Busteed, 33, said part of his role was to provide a calming influence. "I just keep telling them, 'It takes time; it takes years,' " he said.AdvertisementIt also helps to have emergency financial reserves, as the Marthenses were repeatedly told in the innkeeping course they took before the purchase.One morning in mid-March, for instance, after a weird but typical Block Island spring -- alternating periods of icy cold fog and blazing sun -- the Marthenses realized that the paint applied just last summer by the previous owners had begun to bubble and peel. It was a month before opening day, and the whole exterior needed painting. That crisis, along with the sheets and a few lesser bumps, have pushed the couple's first-year expenses about 15 percent to 20 percent higher than they had planned, although still within the amount they had set aside. Most of their other assets -- including the proceeds from their home in Connecticut and almost all their savings -- have been put into the down payment on the inn, which they bought for $1.1 million.The real bottom line of innkeeping, however, is not the money but the workload: as the summer season reaches its crescendo, from mid-August through Labor Day, and the inn is full almost every night, the Marthenses say they are working harder than they ever have.Forget the genteel charm of the inn's croquet-field front lawn, the wide-beamed wicker-strewn front porch and the melodic tinkling of the early evening cocktail hour. You cannot hear the hushed, distant thunder of the surf when you are behind the front desk, or at the computer, paying the bills at 5 A.M.What's worse, the Marthenses have found that in order to spend time with their 5-year-old son, Brad Jr., and minimize his hours in day care, they must work separate shifts, which means less time together as a family. One of them must always be on duty by 6:30 A.M. to help get ready for the breakfast buffet, and one -- usually Mr. Marthens -- also works in the evenings, helping out in the dining room."We've lost dinner time together," Mrs. Marthens said.At crush times, like Sunday morning checkout time, they work side by side behind the front desk, beaming at the compliments and listening with solicitous earnestness to the complaints, while their son plays on the front foyer carpet.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Sunday scene at the front desk epitomizes the Marthenses' juggling act: One woman wants to check out but worries about her bags. Two tennis players, who are not guests, saunter in, wondering why they were kicked off the court. That forces Mr. Marthens to play the heavy; the courts, he tells them, are reserved for guests.Meanwhile, Brad Jr., with a glue stick, cotton balls and paper, is creating art and playing peekaboo with guests through the grandfather clock's glass window. When the traffic clears, Mr. Marthens steps out from behind the desk, absently picks up scraps of waste paper, approves his son's project -- all the while engaging another guest in conversation -- then heads back behind the counter.Want a day off? If it's August, it's probably out of the question. An old inn full of guests cries out at every turn with its endless wants. If you do not consciously drag yourself away, it will suck you back in. Even slipping away for just a few hours is an act of will.Advertisement"Not caving in -- that's the hard part," said Mrs. Marthens, 37, a former office manager who quit her job when her son was born. "You just have to say, 'I'm going.' " Block Island's summer economy works on the same principle -- that a whole year's worth of commerce can be crammed into one season. In high summer, 15,000 people might be on the 11-square-mile island -- whole battalions in running shorts and roller-blades, sweatbands and swimsuits. There are two seasonal movie theaters, and you can get a plate of calamari at Rebecca's until 2 A.M.In winter, almost all the inns, including the Atlantic, close, along with many of the stores, and the population plummets, to about 500.But island life also has a continuity the Marthenses said they had not anticipated. Lives get bound up in places like the Atlantic Inn. Old properties like this attract orbits of people who love them, and they sometimes cannot tear themselves away.When Mrs. Marthens's father died in June near Providence, R.I., for example, she said her grief had been immediately tinged with panic. How could they leave the inn? Who would cover for them?From out of the blue, the previous managers -- Mr. Busteed's parents, Ken and Linda -- called from their home in Vermont. They had heard from their son and through the Atlantic Inn network that the Marthenses were in trouble. Did they need a couple of pinch-hitters for a week, at no charge?"Innkeeping is such a commitment," Mrs. Busteed explained.  "You put so much of yourself into it, 15 hours a day, every day you're open. There's like a loyalty, an esprit de corps as things blossom -- it's hard to leave."Bill Keogh is another member of the Atlantic Inn cast. A 45-year-old carpenter and handyman with a ponytail and a beeper, he came for a couple of weeks of work, putting up siding for the previous owners. That was 16 years ago, and he's still here."I was still in my radical stage -- my hippie stage, maybe," said Mr. Keogh, who had bounced around much of the country before landing here. "I'd found a lot of New England difficult, but this place was different."AdvertisementMr. Keogh, known to all as B. K., eventually started his own construction business on the island and started a family. But when the Marthenses arrived, he returned to help them paint the inn's rooms throughout the winter.And the Marthenses say they will never forget one of their first guests, a librarian from New York City. For a time, in fact, she was the inn's only guest. Sometimes in the mornings and afternoons, she and the Marthenses would sit together and chat. She learned their story and met their son, who will enter kindergarten this fall, and when the islandwide town meeting was held during her stay, she went as a sort of amateur anthropologist, intrigued by island politics. She also brought back all the literature she could find about the island's school system, while the Marthenses stayed at the inn and worked."She was just the nicest woman in the world," Mr. Marthens said. "It was exactly the right way for us to kind of ease into innkeeping."Atlantic Inn veterans like Mr. Keogh say they believe the island and the inn will also fold the Marthenses in its embrace so they will never want to leave. Standing on the croquet field as fog swirled around the inn's yellow porch lights, Mr. Keogh said that even if things do not quite work out, island life gradually takes you in and keeps you, and you're better for it."I've been broke, and I can't think of a better place to be broke," he said.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 14, 1995, on Page B00001 of the National edition with the headline: It's Not Quite Paradise; Running an Inn on Block Island Teaches Owners All About Beauty and Balance Sheets. 
The following equity and convertible-debt offerings are expected this week:AG Associates Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., an initial public offering of 1.8 million shares. Oppenheimer & Co.Baan Co. N.V., the Netherlands, an initial public offering of six million shares, 4.5 million in the United States and Canada. Goldman, Sachs.Cinergi Pictures Entertainment Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., three million shares. Natwest Securities Corp..Colonial Properties Trust, Birmingham, Ala., three million shares. Lehman Brothers.Computer Learning Centers Inc., Fairfax, Va., an initial public offering of two million shares. Robertson, Stephens & Co.AdvertisementCopart Inc., Vallejo, Calif., 1.65 million shares. Smith Barney.Duke Realty Investments Inc., Indianapolis, 2.5 million shares. Merrill Lynch.ERD Waste Corp., Long Beach, L.I., an initial public offering of two million shares. Hampshire Securities Corp.Garden Fresh Restaurant Corp., San Diego, an initial public offering of 1.5 million shares. Wedbush Morgan Securities.General Growth Properties, Des Moines, five million shares. Goldman, Sachs.Harmonic Lightwaves Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.6 million shares. Bear, Stearns.Healthplan Services Corp., Tampa, Fla., an initial public offering of 3.5 million shares. Smith Barney.Intrav Inc., St. Louis, an initial public offering of 2.075 million shares. Kemper Securities.Israel Chemicals Ltd., Tel Aviv, an initial public offering of 8.1826 million shares, each representing 30 ordinary shares. Lehman Brothers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jilin Chemical Industrial Company, China, an initial public offering of 893 million class H ordinary shares, including 4.5 million American depository shares, each representing 100 class H ordinary shares. Merrill Lynch.Laclede Gas Co., St. Louis, 1.55 million shares. Merrill Lynch.Loewen Group Inc., Vancouver, British Columbia, five million shares, four million in the United States and Canada). Smith Barney.Metatec Corp., Dublin, Ohio, 1.5 million shares. Legg Mason Wood Walker.MFS Communications Co., Omaha, 7.4 million depository shares, each representing interest in a share of dividend-enhanced convertible stock, --/B-/--. Salomon Brothers.AdvertisementNGC Corp., the Woodlands, Tex., 4.9 million shares. Lehman Brothers.Netcom On-Line Communication, San Jose, Calif., 2.4 million shares. Alex. Brown.Network Express Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich., 2.7 million shares. Unterberg Harris.Northstar Health Services Inc., Pittsburgh, 1.75 million shares. Commonwealth Associates.Odwalla Inc., Davenport, Calif., one million shares. Hambrecht & Quist.Opal Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., an initial public offering of two million shares. Hambrecht & Quist.Ultratech Stepper, San Jose, Calif., two million shares. Montgomery Securities.Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc., Houston, 10 million shares, 8 million in the United States and Canada. Salomon Brothers.Source: MCM CorporateWatch.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this schedule appears in print on May 15, 1995, on Page D00004 of the National edition with the headline: Equity Offerings for This Week. 
NEW SCHOOLS SEEK SMALL MIRACLESMany of New York City's 125 high schools have become aging behemoths, seemingly incapable of adapting to a changing world, and too many have become academically barren and violent places. Two years ago, the city school system came up with a remedy that some say is its most radical change since its decentralization in 1969: the development of 48 experimental small schools, 46 of them high schools with enrollments of 110 to 600 students, with more scaled-down schools on the drawing boards. The idea behind the new schools is disarmingly simple: smaller is better. The big question, of course, is do these schools work? The answer is distinctly uncertain.  [ Page A1. ] HOW A SMALL SCHOOL MAKES A DIFFERENCEFor Migna B. Taveras, the school day begins not much differently than for thousands of other New York City high school students. She leaves her Lower East Side apartment, rushes downstairs to a corner bodega and buys bagels and coffee, which she consumes on her walk to school. But once at Vanguard High, a small school that opened in 1993, her routine differs markedly from that of most of the city's 265,000 secondary students.  [ B5. ] PATAKI GIVES UP A BIT ON WELFAREThe budget that Governor Pataki proposed in February rested on the three pillars of his campaign: cutting income taxes, putting welfare recipients to work and reducing spending. But with budget negotiations seemingly close to completion, Mr. Pataki will fall short of the specific goals he set in his original budget proposal, and perhaps nowhere more than with welfare. Although opinion polls suggest that welfare may be the strongest issue in his favor, the Republican Governor bargained away several of his most significant welfare initiatives in order to secure agreement from Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat, on a tax cut package.  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  TALES OF SUCCESS FROM 257 STUDENTSAmong the success stories from the New York City schools are 257 graduating seniors who won $4,000 college scholarships from the United Federation of Teachers, the city's teachers union. The 24-year-old scholarship program benefits low-income students who meet financial and academic criteria. The winners come from all five boroughs, and all kinds of high schools. They are black and white and Asian. They speak English with accents and without. They were born in China and India, in Santo Domingo and Queens. And while they sometimes sound more like survivors than celebrants, as they talk of overcrowded classes and metal detectors and rowdy classmates, they are going on to colleges and careers. Just as New York City public school students did in less troubled days.  [ Metro Matters, B3. ] IF THIS IS GRIDLOCK, IT MUST BE SUMMERAdvertisementAh, summer weekends in New York. Marching for causes, grazing at street fairs and pitying the poor souls who think the best way around town involves internal combustion. Forget the calendar that says summer begins at the solstice or the tradition that says the start is Memorial Day. Summer begins with the first full-fledged day of weekend-event-induced gridlock, and that was yesterday.  [ B3. ] MOURNING A SLAIN STORE OWNERPeople remember Nelson Arias as a friendly store owner -- the kind who let you buy on credit because he recognized your face, the kind who always had a few special words for your granddaughter when you brought her into his store. But yesterday, those shoppers whose days were made more pleasant by Mr. Arias's greeting were met instead with horrible news: the grocer had been shot and killed the night before, apparently in a robbery.  [ B2. ] REGION  UNIVERSITIES AWARD DEGREESYale University, Long Island University's Southampton Center and Manhattan College were among the schools across the region holding commencement ceremonies yesterday. At Yale's Class Day ceremony, Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke of Baltimore called American cities as vital to the nation as the Sun is to Earth. At Southampton College, Bennett R. Cohen and Jerry Greenfield, of ice cream fame, called on students to look beyond private profit in their dealings with the world.  [ B6. ] Chronicle B2We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 1995, on Page B00001 of the National edition with the headline: METRO DIGEST. 
IN RETROSPECT The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam. By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. Illustrated. 414 pp. New York: Times Books/Random House. $27.50.IN his 79th year, Robert S. McNamara at long last offers the public a glimpse of his aching conscience. The most willful Vietnam warrior in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, he was also the first at the top to admit defeat, in private. He then stood silent on the war for a quarter-century and drowned his sorrow in good works at the World Bank. Mr. McNamara personified the slow maturing of America's foreign policy from cocky interventionism to cost-conscious realism, yet for a generation he refused to explain his conversion, explore his mistakes, judge his colleagues or instruct posterity. The pain, or the guilt, was simply too great. As he states in the preface to "In Retrospect": "This is the book I planned never to write."Until now, he contends, the story of how "the best and the brightest" got it wrong in Vietnam has not been told. But David Halberstam, who applied that ironic phrase to his rendering of the tale 23 years ago, told it better in many ways than Mr. McNamara does now. So, too, did the Pentagon Papers, that huge trove of documents assembled at Mr. McNamara's behest when he first recognized a debt to history. The contemporary analyses in the papers, which were leaked to The Times in 1971, stand up so well that they now serve their patron as a major source.What Mr. McNamara adds to the public record are some White House documents and tape transcripts revealing, most notably, his own agonized attempts in 1967 to persuade President Lyndon B. Johnson to stop sending more men to the slaughter: the Secretary of Defense who had come to tame the Pentagon with managerial wizardry ended up desperately begging for a fig leaf for withdrawal, in the form of a coalition that would inevitably give the Vietcong dominance in Saigon. Mr. McNamara says he does not know to this day whether he thus quit or was fired. "Maybe it was both."AdvertisementBut he left with a whimper, not a bang. So why speak out now? The main reason, he says, is that he has "grown sick at heart witnessing the cynicism and even contempt" with which so many Americans view their institutions and leaders. He knows how much Vietnam contributed to that disaffection; he would never deny the war's terrible damage. But he hopes to prove that the mistakes were "mostly honest," even if traceable to a ghastly ignorance of the Vietnamese people, culture and terrain, and the historical forces of that time.Why should the rest of us relive his agony? Mr. McNamara, characteristically statistical, points to "11 major causes for our disaster in Vietnam" in a chapter called "The Lessons of Vietnam." But implicitly his book screams another lesson: Though cynicism and contempt for power are destructive of government, a respectful skepticism is essential, and rarely wrong.BY delaying his war memoir so long, Mr. McNamara has greatly compounded the difficulty of his mission. Now that the Soviet Union lies in ruins and American corporations beg for business in China and Vietnam, no one under the age of 50 can be expected to fathom the fears and phobias of the 1960's to which he rightly ascribes the Indochina disaster. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, the most venerated American of the time, had taught -- and the Kennedy and Johnson teams never dared to doubt in time -- that if South Vietnam was "lost" to Communism, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Malaysia would fall like dominoes, imperiling India, Burma, Indonesia and the Philippines, if not also Japan, and emboldening the Russians and Chinese to extend Communist conquests by military force or subversion in ways that would sooner or later provoke a nuclear World War III, the very destruction of civilization.Yes, that is how America's leaders spoke to each other and, all too persuasively, to the public. Mr. McNamara's book reminds us that they even repeated the litany in memos to their Presidents, to inoculate them against any temptation to retreat from Vietnam. And if all those dominoes were not cause enough, there were promises to be kept in order to preserve the value of America's other diplomatic threats and commitments.Mr. McNamara and his generation came to power convinced that the "appeasement" of Nazi Germany -- the failure to block its early grasp for Europe's dominoes -- had led inevitably to a catastrophic World War II. Averting another such disaster, they were sure, required punishing anything resembling Communist aggression in its earliest stages, when the cost would be tolerable. That was their creed as they rebuilt Western Europe and stood toe to toe with the Soviet armies across Germany, fought to a bloody stalemate against China in Korea, threatened war over Berlin and risked war to force Soviet missiles out of Cuba. Thus "contained," the Soviets and Chinese took to endorsing "wars of liberation," thereby qualifying even distant uprisings as threats to American security. Mr. McNamara's first assignment from President John F. Kennedy was to augment America's nuclear power, whose use was unimaginable, with the forces and weapons they were sure would be needed to fight "conventional" wars.From this bed of doctrine grew what Mr. McNamara considers his team's most fateful error: mistaking Ho Chi Minh's nationalist drive to unite Vietnam as the challenge of a monolithic Communist world. That misjudgment foreclosed any discussion of how an American withdrawal from Indochina could be made strategically tolerable. It even prevented analysis, before the plunge, of how high a price the commitment was worth. Mr. McNamara's dry rendering of those fateful tenets of containment fails to convey the passion with which they were embraced. And he mostly ignores their powerful resonance in domestic politics.Kennedy, no less than Johnson, subscribed to these simplistic doctrines and the misjudgments they inspired, even though Mr. McNamara, without persuasive evidence, deems it "highly probable" that Kennedy would have pulled back from massive intervention in a second term. This presumes that had Kennedy lived, the same cast of senior officials would have avoided what Mr. McNamara describes as a second tier of error: the failure to live by the mantra that the battle in Vietnam was political, a fight for the "hearts and minds" of an abused peasantry, and that Americans could assist but never supplant the South Vietnamese.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In this pew, Mr. McNamara himself was a prominent sinner. His can-do spirit found no mission impossible, even as Saigon's governments and armies crumbled. His domineering intellect and predilection for systems analysis made him a pathetic victim of erroneous and deceptive military audits of bodies counted, weapons captured, sorties flown, supply lines ruptured. Soon enough, as the press decided, it became "McNamara's war," and certainly America's.Mr. McNamara deplores the absence of political advice from old Asia hands who had been driven from Government service in the McCarthy purges. But as he proves again in this memoir, he did not easily integrate political wisdom and intuition into his analyses. Even in retrospect, he does not associate the drift into war in Vietnam with the Republican taunts that Democrats had "lost" China to Communism. (Kennedy was afraid to recognize not only China but even Outer Mongolia!) Mr. McNamara cannot bring himself to believe that the election calendar affected Johnson's willingness to escalate the war in 1965 but not in 1964 or, as Johnson eventually confessed to Doris Kearns, that he stayed the course in Asia because he feared losing effectiveness at home -- like Truman after the "loss" of China -- as much as he feared the repercussions of defeat abroad.AdvertisementFinally, Mr. McNamara recounts a third tier of error -- an escalating pattern of military misjudgment. He is hard on the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their misplaced optimism in the early years, their always excessive faith in high-tech weapons and their later expectations that massive bombing and frontal battles could wear down the Vietnamese enemy. He is remiss in not fully rebutting the postwar claims that timid civilians had tied the military's hands with unreasonable limits on troop commitments and bombing targets. Mr. McNamara emphasizes how little was accomplished by bombings heavier even than those in World War II. And he explains Johnson's caution in target selection by recalling the fear that a more rapid escalation could provoke Chinese intervention. But Americans who cannot accept David's triumph over Goliath draw more belligerent "lessons" from this history, which Mr. McNamara should have engaged more directly.Even more disappointing is Mr. McNamara's unwillingness to explore the human tragedies and political legacies of this longest American war. What was it like to send tens of thousands to their deaths in an increasingly dubious cause? How did the strain affect the men in charge? We get a glimpse of Jacqueline Kennedy beating him on the chest in protest against the war, and of angry insults hurled on the ski slopes, but no real introspection. Mr. McNamara says the war tore deeply at his own family, but quickly adds: "I am not comfortable speaking in such terms."What then of the political legacy? How, without growing cynical, can citizens protect themselves against the stubborn ignorance and misplaced zeal of their leaders? In the darkest days, Mr. McNamara remembers, he watched the demonstrators from his Pentagon window and insisted that his subordinates show respect for the freedoms of speech and assembly. But he took refuge -- and takes it even now -- in opinion polls that recorded support from the majority of Americans who, as he well knew, had been misinformed and denied vital information at every major turn."Looking back," he writes, "I clearly erred by not forcing . . . a knock-down, drag-out debate over the loose assumptions, unasked questions and thin analyses underlying our military strategy in Vietnam. I had spent 20 years as a manager identifying problems and forcing organizations -- often against their will -- to think deeply and realistically about alternative courses of action and their consequences. I doubt I will ever fully understand why I did not do so here."YET even now Mr. McNamara means he should have stirred debate only inside the small circle of Presidential counselors led by himself, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser (later succeeded by Walt Rostow). Mr. McNamara blames Johnson for going to war furtively, with no regard for the rights of Congress and the public, but he rejects any obligation to resign in protest or, once out of office, to share his policy disagreements with the country. Cabinet officers, he contends, should have a constituency of one: the President -- from whom they derive all authority and through whom alone they can be held accountable.That is surely the right ethic for normal times. Unelected officials should not steal their President's mandate to pursue an independent course. But a thousand dead Americans a month create their own constituency. Even military discipline admits a higher duty than hierarchical loyalty when power is badly used and puts lives at risk.Mr. McNamara relieved his private turmoil by reading poetry, and shared his misgivings with Robert F. Kennedy and a few other intimates. But he refused to abandon or attack the President whom he had helped to guide into quicksand. He and Johnson "loved and respected" each other, in a bond that even now, in retrospect, keeps the public at a distance looking on, with skepticism, I hope.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this review appears in print on April 16, 1995, on Page 7007001 of the National edition with the headline: McNamara's Retreat.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

International 2-5  A PUSH FOR TIES WITH VIETNAM  For the first time, a number of senior Administration officials have been recommending that the United States establish full diplomatic relations with Vietnam.  1GAZANS GUARD THEIR GUNS  Despite pledges by Palestinian officials to confiscate illegal weapons and punish offenders, a deadline for licensing of weapons in Gaza has come and gone.  3  ARABS TO MEET ON LAND SEIZURE  Israel's confiscation of Arab land in Jerusalem has galvanized Arab kings and presidents to begin planning a rare summit meeting in the next two weeks.  3  CHINA ARRESTS DISSIDENT  Chinese officials have arrested a prominent intellectual as he and 55 others were preparing to issue a call to commemorate deaths at Tiananmen Square.  4  SPLIT IN INDIA'S RULING PARTY  Simmering tensions within India's governing Congress Party broke into open revolt with a mass rally at which a dissident faction named a new party leader.  4  THAI GOVERNMENT FALLS  The Government of Chuan Leekpai, Thailand's longest-serving elected Prime Minister, collapsed in the midst of a scandal over a Government land-reform program.  4  TRUCKERS' LIFELINE TO BOSNIA  The world's riskiest trucking operation has been bringing food and other aid to those trapped by war in Bosnia, where up to 2.7 million people depend on relief convoys.  5  WARNING ON BOSNIA PULLOUT  Defense Secretary William J. Perry told the United Nations Secretary General that pulling peacekeepers from Bosnia would be dangerous for the Balkans region.  5  Montreal Journal: Biker gangs disruption of a city neighborhood.  2  National 6-10, 24  NASA ANNOUNCES CUTBACKS  The space agency said it would cut its work force and streamline operations as its budget shrinks in an era of austerity.  1  A REPUBLICAN'S DILEMMA  Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine, is in a bind: how to cut spending without unduly endangering the interests of the people back home who elected her.  1  FRIEND TIES McVEIGH TO BOMBING  A friend of Timothy J. McVeigh told Federal authorities that he and Mr. McVeigh inspected the Federal Building in Oklahoma City as a bombing target, officials said.  1  BUILDING IDENTIFIED AS '83 TARGET  A Federal prosecutor said the Federal Building in Oklahoma City was marked as a potential bombing target 12 years ago by a white-supremacist group.  6  CLINTON CHALLENGES N.R.A.  President Clinton called on the National Rifle Association to donate the proceeds from a disputed fund-raising letter to the families of police officers slain on duty.  7  SENATE REJECTS CLINTON BUDGET  The Senate voted 99 to 0 to reject President Clinton's budget in a political ritual reminiscent of similar Congressional actions when Republicans were in the White House and Democrats ruled Capitol Hill.  8  AIDE WILL NOT BE INDICTED  The Whitewater independent counsel has decided not to indict President Clinton's aide Bruce Lindsey on Federal banking charges.  8  GRAPHIC DESCRIPTIONS OF KILLINGS  Prosecutors in the Simpson case described in graphic detail how they believed the two victims were killed last year.  7  PRESSURES ON DISEASE CENTER  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention finds itself hard pressed to cope with the deadly Ebola virus epidemic in Zaire.  9  PROTECTIONS FOR HOMOSEXUALS  The Rhode Island Legislature completed work on a bill guaranteeing civil rights for homosexuals.  10  Religion: American Muslims seek a better understanding.  10  Metro Digest 25  SPECIAL EDUCATION PROPOSAL  An independent panel released a plan to dramatically restructure the city's special education program, dismantling a system that now consumes more than 22 cents of every education dollar.  1  GIULIANI CALLS FOR POLICE INQUIRY  Angered by the drunken rampage of several dozen officers in Washington early this week, Mayor Giuliani called on the District of Columbia police department to conduct a full criminal investigation and promised New York's support.  1  Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 13-18  Theater: Ensemble Studio Theater.  13  Music: Playing the blues.  13  Artis Wodehouse's recital.  17  Two Russian singers.  18  Dance: "West Side Story Suite." 13  "Romeo and Juliet." 18  Sports 30-35  Baseball: Mets win.  33  Basketball: Knicks force Game 7.  31  Boxing: Jimmy Garcia dies of injuries.  35  Columns: Araton on the Knicks.  31  Obituaries 10-11  Seymour B. Durst, Manhattan real-estate investor and developer.  11  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  The N.Y.P.D. bacchanal.  China's conscience.  Wayne LaPierre, on the ropes.  Connecticut's bad school choices.  Letters  Russell Baker: Inching down Fifth.  Bob Herbert: Those wonderful kids.  Katherine S. Newman: What inner-city jobs for welfare moms?  Henry I. Miller: The F.D.A.'s fear of the future. Bridge 18 Chronicle 28 Crossword 16We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 1995, on Page 1001002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
JUST three years ago, the pocket-sized explosive devices that Ralph Dodd manufactures helped steer Hawk anti-aircraft missiles. Last Thursday, Mr. Dodd, the president of Cartridge Actuated Devices in Fairfield, showed the same mechanism to a potential customer looking for a better way to inflate automobile airbags.Such are the adaptations that New Jersey's small manufacturers are making. Whether by changing gears, riding a trend or staking out a market so small that there is little competition -- like Miller Berry & Sons of Port Norris, one of only three makers of casket mattresses in the country -- many smaller businesses are hanging on even as bigger factories continue to desert the state in droves. Not all of them are thriving -- Mr. Dodd has laid off half his employees in the past five years -- but a great many are surviving.If any reminder was needed that manufacturing in New Jersey is fading, earlier this summer, manufacturing jobs in the state dipped below 500,000 for the first time since the end of World War I, down from a high of almost 900,000 in 1969. Once the eighth largest manufacturing employer in the country, the state has tumbled to 13th, behind such upstarts as Georgia, North Carolina and Tennessee. And the factories that once employed half the state's workers now provide only 14 percent of New Jersey's jobs, even less than the national average of 16 percent.But while big manufacturers, especially those with plants outside the state, have fewer reasons to stay in a place where wages are high, real estate and electricity are expensive and environmental regulations relatively strict, many smaller firms are finding ways to adapt. And there are a lot of them: the 1995 Harris Infosource International 1995 New Jersey Manufacturers Database lists more than 8,100 firms statewide with fewer than 100 employees.Advertisement"Most of what recent expansion there's been in manufacturing in the state has been in small firms, and small firms have been the source of most job creations," said James W. Hughes, dean of the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at Rutgers University. "Big firms haven't been growing for a long time," he said, noting that companies sometimes subcontract work to smaller manufacturers here and overseas."That gives the opportunity for the creation of small firms, some of which have been created by people who have been outsourced themselves and know the business."One of the few areas of manufacturing growth in the state capitalizes on environmental rules themselves. Plastics recycling, a field that didn't even exist in New Jersey until recycling laws and bottle bills were passed in the 1980's, now provides more than 450 private-sector jobs statewide, according to the state Department of Environmental Protection. Overall, recycling employs 12,550 people in the private sector, a number that will only grow as the local market for recycled goods continues to expand.While large manufacturers are still found mostly in red-brick urban industrial districts and along interstates, small factories are everywhere in New Jersey, hiding in plain sight in office parks and along two-lane roads, churning out everything from felt to feed screws to frozen hors d'oeuvres. Here is how a few of them are faring. Violet Packing Company, Williamstown   Established 1882   Employees: 35 in peak season.  Product: crushed tomatoes and tomato sauces  Annual sales: about $10 millionAll Violet Packing has had to do to assure its place in the tomatophile's pantheon is to keep doing what it has been doing for 110 years. Violet, which makes Sclafani crushed tomatoes and Don Pepino marinara, spaghetti and pizza sauces, is the last remaining canner of fresh, vine-ripened New Jersey tomatoes in the country.Most tomato packers -- including the Redpack plant in not-too-distant Cedarville -- don't even start with tomatoes anymore, but make their products from reconstituted California tomato paste. And as the world is discovering, South Jersey's sandy, loamy soil produces some of the best tomatoes on earth."It's a sweeter taste than a California tomato," said Fred Waibel, Violet's production manager, "sweet but tomato-y, not that tasteless blah that processing tomatoes tend to have."Mr. Waibel noted that this year's hot, dry summer has been good for New Jersey tomatoes."The soluble solids are a little higher than usual, so the flavor and the color are a little better," he said. "We've had a moist New Jersey spring and a California-like dry summer, which is perfect."Indeed. A blind taste test between Sclafani crushed tomatoes and two other brands, Redpack and Tuttarossa, proved to be no contest. The Sclafani tomatoes positively danced on the palate, even carrying traces of the zingy smell-taste of the tomato patch. The other two were almost tasteless with a burned undernote, like music with the bass frequencies turned up way too high and everything else inaudible.AdvertisementMost of Violet's sales are to the food service industry, so the products can be hard to find at your local grocer, but Loffredo's Deli in Orange and Zabar's in Manhattan both carry the crushed tomatoes.For the 400 tons of plum tomatoes that arrive in open-topped trucks at Violet's Gloucester County factory every morning from mid-July to early October, the journey from vine to can takes only a few hours.On the mezzanine overlooking the sorting floor, a quality control tester, Rafael Rodriguez, scooped a pitcherful of simmering sauce from a vat and poured a sample into a device that measures consistency. He hit a lever and the sauce flowed down a ramp with a glug, coming to a somewhere between 8 and 10. Mr. Rodriguez flicked a switch on a control board that said "spice" and a green light went on."It's not quite like grandma's kitchen," Mr. Waibel said, "but it sure tastes like it."  Step and a Half Toys, Oldwick   Established 1994   Employees: 2   Product: Electronic musical children's products  Annual sales: Not yet known.Early last year, Jim Wilcox went shopping for step stools, the kind that youngsters use to reach the bathroom sink, and was pleased to find nothing of interest whatsoever."What there was, was basically plastic boxes with no incentive to get kids to wash their face and hands and brush their teeth," he said.For Mr. Wilcox, a veteran toy designer, this meant the market was ripe for his latest concept: an electronic singing step stool. He formed his own company, Step and a Half Toys, and started making the Lil' Lion, the Lil' Puppy and the Lil' Dino, a purple dinosaur.When stepped on, the durable plastic critters say "Ruff ruff" (the puppy) or "Rrroar" (the lion and the dinosaur), and then sing, "Time to brush your teeth and wash your face and hands." The voice of the hygiene mantra is that of Mr. Wilcox himself.AdvertisementPriced to sell for $12 to $15, the lil' trio hit the stores in May with a bang, Mr. Wilcox said. Hill's department stores ordered 10,000 and has sold 2,500 already. Jamesway, with 23 stores in New Jersey, will begin carrying them next month. His bigest hope, however, is to get shelf space at Toys "R" Us."They sell over 100,000 step stools a year," he said. "It would be nice if we could get half of that action."Aware of the challenges facing a one-product toy company, Mr. Wilcox returned to the woodshed recently and came up with an even more revolutionary device: the world's first electronic singing potty seat.After using the seat, the toddler pushes a button and the lil' potty sings, "A-B-C-D-E-F-G, Won't you be so proud of me."The idea, Mr. Wilcox said, was to allow toddlers more independence."Children sort of like their privacy when they do No. 2," he said, "so when the child's finished, he can just press the button and let mom know."Mr. Wilcox said the jingle was the hardest part."For a long time, all I could come up with was 'Tinkle tinkle little lamb, what a great big kid I am,' " he said. "I thought that might be a little offensive. Then the night before we went into the recording studio it hit me."Mr. Wilcox hopes to launch the potty seat within a few months, using the same Kearny housewares manufacturer that makes the step stools."I'm paying a little more than I would have elsewhere, but they have a lot of experience getting the material shipped out in a timely fashion," he said.  "Besides," he added, "I'd rather have control. If you have a mold and you have someone making the product overseas and the mold breaks, you don't want to be flying to China." Advanced Manufacturing, Paterson   Established 1992   Employees: 13   Product: Plastic bags, mostly from recycled materials   Annual sales: UnavailableAdvertisementPressed flat and hanging on the paneled office wall, they look like championship jerseys -- blue, brown, white, black, beige, pink. But instead of numbers, they carry timeless homilies like "Thank You For Shopping With Us." For Advanced Manufacturing Inc., each plastic shopping bag represents a triumph.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Except for jobs that require intricate printing (like the pink one, emblazoned with a dragon logo and the address of a Chinese grocery store in Queens), A.M.I. makes its bags out of recycled plastic -- former detergent bottles, Chef Boy-Ar-Dee tubs, other shopping bags. Until recently, processors have been exporting most of the recyclable plastic that New Jerseyans throw away, but now the local market is expanding, thanks to increased environmental consciousness and government prodding. One new product at A.M.I., for instance, is the blue-tinted bags used in the New York City recycling program."Plastics have made a quantum leap in the past two years," said Frank Peluso, the supervisor of market development for the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's division of solid and hazardous waste.Because plastic bags are easy to make, the increased demand has triggered a glut of suppliers, many of them start-ups like A.M.I."It's really cutthroat," said Carla Asmar, A.M.I.'s office manager and unofficial spokeswoman. "Almost anybody who's worked behind an extruder will go out and buy one for $25,000 and say, 'I'm going to open a business.' Twelve years ago, you could walk into a grocery store and get $25 to $30 for a case of shopping bags. Now they go for $10 to $13."Out on the factory floor, a hose sucks pellets of low-density polyethylene from a cardboard box and feeds them into a chamber, where they are heated into a jelly. A column of air forced up through the gel blows a tall plastic bubble, which is pressed flat and then reeled onto a spool. Another machine crimps and cuts the bags and cuts out the handles.The bags that A.M.I.manufactures in this way are considerably thicker than the more crinkly high-density bags used by some supermarkets. They come 500 to a case rather than 1,000, but because they don't need to be doubled, customers consider them more efficient."Most people use the milk-gallon test to test a bag," Ms. Asmar said. "If you can put two in there and it doesn't break, then it's a good bag. These are good bags." Cartridge Actuated Devices, Fairfield  Established 1963  Employees: 50  Product: Explosive devices   Annual sales: Less than $5 millionWhatever problems confront a manufacturer in New Jersey today, defense contractors have them in spades. C.A.D., longtime supplier to Lockheed, Martin Marietta and the U.S. Navy, has had to scramble to find peacetime uses for its pyrotechnically powered valves, cutters and thrusters. C.A.D. exploding devices are now used to put out fires (by breaking the seal on a sprinkler system), and the company president, Ralph Dodd, has high hopes for an exploding plastic bolt that he expects to be a big seller to offshore oil drillers.Advertisement"If you've got two things you want to put together and you want to be able to just break them apart, maybe at the bottom of the ocean, this is the way to do it," he said. C.A.D., tucked away behind an auto parts store off Route 46, has also begun using its lab to test other company's products."I don't see this stuff completely taking the place of the defense jobs, but it all depends," said Mr. Dodd, 64, who bought C.A.D. 11 years ago, "If you can click with an air-bag manufacturer, the sky's the limit."Still, Mr. Dodd's optimism is extremely qualified. Sales are down 40 percent from five years ago, and of what's left, the fraction sold to the military has dropped from almost 90 percent to 50 percent.The especially rapid decline of the defense industry in the Northeast has hit C.A.D. from both sides: not only are Mr. Dodd's customers disappearing, his own suppliers are moving south, driving up transportation costs. Within the past two years, Hercules, a pioneer in the state's once mighty explosives industry, and a nearby Du Pont powder plant both announced that they would close."We're working in a very limited market," Mr. Dodd said. "If we were making shoes or clothing it would be different. But when's the last time you bought an explosive device for your household?"  Laird & Co., Scobeyville   Established 1780   Employees: 55   Product: Applejack and other hard liquors; bottlers and importers of wine and other spirits.  Annual sales: $38 millionThe barrel house, stacked to the rafters with oaken kegs, still smells like an enormous wooden snifter and looks like something from a Jack Daniel's ad. But since 1978, Laird & Company, makers of the oldest registered spirit in the country, has distilled its signature applejack in North Garden, Va."It's just too expensive to operate in this sate," said the president, Larrie Laird, citing the high cost of environmental permits and waste-water treatment. The company, tucked away on 25 acres among the horse farms of Monmouth County, doesn't have access to a sewer system and must truck its wash water 30 miles to Rahway.At the same time, said Mr. Laird, the eighth generation of Laird to run the business, most of the local orchards that once supplied the raw materials have been swallowed by housing developments.Advertisement"That's another reason we wouldn't make an investment here to continue distilling," he said.Instead, Laird has become a bottler, not just of applejack but of vodka, gin, tequila, bourbon and scotch, marketed both under the Laird name and other labels. Five O'Clock vodka is the company's biggest seller. And as consumption of hard liquor has dropped, Laird has turned increasingly to importing wine from Italy and France. Mr. Laird explained that the wines, which retail for up to $30 a bottle, are a lot more profitable than low-priced spirits.  Miller Berry & Sons, Port Norris   Established 1967   Employees: 20   Product: Casket mattresses, elevating mechanisms   Annual sales: About $3 millionTwenty-eight years ago, the Berry family's excelsior business was on its deathbed, unable to compete with the big loggers in Virginia. Clarence Berry called up his steadiest customer, a coffin manufacturerwho used the pine shavings to stuff his mattresses."I told him I had two more trailer loads left and that was it," Mr. Berry, now 68, recalled. "He said, 'You don't know anybody that makes a bed for caskets, do you? Because if we can find somebody we're gonna buy 'em.' I thought, Well hey, here's a market waiting for a producer."Today, in a rambling complex of cinder-block buildings along a road paved with clamshells in New Jersey's semi-defunct oyster capital, Miller Berry's team of welders and assemblers turns out 4,000 casket mattresses a week."This is softer than what you sleep on," Mr. Berry said, interrupting a worker's stapling to pat an inch-and-a-half thick polyester pad, now the industry standard. "It's not a bed you could put in a home and have kids jump on for years at a time -- it would go all to pieces -- but you use it one time and that's all you need."Mr. Berry ticks off with pride the celebrities who have gone off to their final rewards on a Miller Berry mattress: Richard and Pat Nixon, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Arthur Ashe."We were in the public eye, but you couldn't see us," he said. Since 1980, Miller Berry has also made mechanisms that raise the deceased's body in the casket for viewing, and Mr. Berry himself is responsible for several advances in the field."When they crank the bed up and down, you can't have any noise, any squealing, so we put nylon bushings on everything," he said. "The undertakers love it."AdvertisementMiller Berry has also introduced a special mattress that absorbs up to 30 pounds of the bodily fluids that inevitably leak out after death. And the company has just started selling a wooden mattress frame in response to a Canadian environmental law that prohibits the use of steel frames for cremation.Business, which has always been at least steady, is booming lately.  Last month, Mr. Berry signed a contract with the nation's third-biggest coffin manufacturer to make 65,000 beds a year, adding about 30 percent to his annual sales. He was so inspired that he came up with a catchy new slogan for the company: "This bed is for the rest of your life."A casket mattress, for those who can't wait until the next life to find out, really is fairly comfortable, although a metal crosspiece presses against the small of the back.Not to worry, Mr. Berry said. "You're not really going to feel that."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 1995, on Page NJ13 of the National edition with the headline: Made in New Jersey. 
ON the northern edge of the Imperial Palace in Tokyo, just beyond the moat, is a vast stone walkway leading to one of Japan's most famous, most fascinating and, for Americans, most infuriating shrines.The Yasukuni Shrine is the spot where Japanese soldiers who died in battle are worshiped as gods. A focal point of Japanese nationalism, its extraordinary museum makes heroes of, among others, the young men who attacked Pearl Harbor, flew kamikaze planes and rampaged across Asia.Emperor Hirohito was forced by the United States after the war to give up his traditional role as a kami, or god. But the foot soldiers who died in World War II were elevated by Shinto folklore to kami, and Yasukuni is where they are worshiped, along with hundreds of thousands of Japanese who fought for Japan in the years since 1869, when the shrine was founded.American tourists tend to flock to other temples and holy sites, such as the Meiji Shrine in Tokyo or the Golden Pavilion in Kyoto, but I find the Yasukuni Shrine and its museum the most intriguing -- and the most troubling. Among those revered here are those executed as war criminals on orders of American and other judges in the Tokyo Trial of 1946 to 1948.AdvertisementYasukuni is meant for Japanese visitors, not Americans. In the museum, most of the displays are captioned only in Japanese, and when I went with my family one recent weekend some veterans standing outside handed me a brochure in Japanese headlined, "Japan was not an aggressor!" It argued that Japan's imperial army in World War II was engaged in a noble effort to free Asia from white colonialism.When World War II ended, the United States occupation authorities forced the Japanese Government to sever its association with Yasukuni, handing it over to an organization that now runs it as a private religious institution. The United States also required the shrine to cover up some militaristic bronze bas-reliefs of such scenes as the Japanese bombing of Shanghai. But the shrine priests uncovered the reliefs in 1957, five years after the end of the American military occupation.The entrance to Yasukuni is a grand promenade through a 24-acre park, with benches where young lovers embrace and old people doze. In the center of the promenade is an imposing bronze statue of Masujiro Omura, the 19th-century founder of Japan's modern army. Omura recruited peasants and workers for the army, a revolutionary step that was not popular with the samurai, the warrior class. Omura was stabbed to death by a group of samurai in 1869, and the statue was erected soon afterward, as the first Western-style sculpture in Japan.At the end of the 500-yard promenade is the shrine itself. A wooden building in traditional Shinto style, it is simple and traditional, with the chrysanthemum -- symbol of the Emperor -- adorning the front.The shrine was founded in 1869, at the beginning of the Meiji era that saw the beginning of the rise of modern Japan. The Meiji Emperor in 1879 gave the shrine its present name, which means peaceful country. The official explanation in an English-language brochure is that the shrine celebrates the soldiers who, since the 1850's, sacrificed their lives so that Japan could enjoy peace today.Record books stored at the shrine keep the names of the 2.46 million people who are looked on as gods. They include the soldiers who died while serving on the victorious side in the Japanese civil war of the 1850's and 1860's, and the Japanese troops who died in subsequent wars (about 2.3 million died in World War II).Female nurses and noncombatants such as engineers who died in battle are also considered gods -- 56,000 of the deities are female -- but civilians who died in Hiroshima or other bombings are not eligible.Shinto is very much the folk religion of Japan, a faith that allows citizens to worship all kinds of gods, including one for rice.AdvertisementMost Japanese are simultaneously Buddhist and Shintoist, but Shinto traditions run deepest in popular culture.It is normal for a Japanese to be married in a Shinto ceremony, go to Shinto festivals, and then be memorialized in a Buddhist funeral.Worshipers at the main Yasukuni altar, under a peaked roof, toss a coin in the grate in front of the shrine, bow twice, clap twice, pray for a wish to come true and bow again. As with most religions, you are not supposed to pray that you will, say, win the lottery, but Japanese say it is considered fine to pray for a baby or for a promotion.As with any Shinto shrine, visitors can buy a plaque for $6 at the little nearby shop, write a message and leave it hanging with the other plaques on the right side of the shrine. When I was there, a boy named Junichiro Hitomi had written "I pray I'll pass the entrance exam at Hami High School."Perhaps the most interesting part of the shrine is the war museum beside it. The museum, called Yushukan, was closed by order of the American occupation authorities in 1945 and turned into an office building. But the shrine opened a small museum in another building in 1961, and in 1986 it reopened the original museum.The first few rooms display uniforms -- some with bloodstains around bullet holes -- as well as swords and guns from 19th-century battles.Pictures of the emperors are everywhere, for Yasukuni was an imperial shrine with close connections to the court.Most of the museum, however, is focused on World War II, and the most interesting room is the central hall, containing such formidable Second World War weapons as the 48-foot kai-ten human torpedo. Kai-ten means return to heaven, for that was the destination of the young sailor steering it.AdvertisementHe would crouch in the center of the nine-ton torpedo, which was packed with explosives, and a mother ship would lower it in the water when American warships were near.The torpedo could travel 48 miles, at a speed of 10 knots. Steering it toward the enemy ship, using a periscope to see while staying just under water, the sailor would ram it into an American ship, blowing up the ship along with himself.The kai-ten torpedo on display was on a Japanese mother ship that was sunk in June 1944 in the Marianas by the United States fleet; some 1,250 Japanese died. Recovered later by the United States, it was given to the United States Army Museum in Hawaii, which has lent it to the Yasukuni Shrine since 1979.Beside the torpedo is a Comet bomber, the only survivor of 2,157 that were produced. Some 260 were used in kamikaze attacks, and many others crashed or were shot down in Midway and other battles.This Comet was found by the Japanese in good condition in the jungle of Yap, a Pacific island, in 1972, and was restored and given to the museum.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the other side of the room is an ohka, or cherry blossom plane, also used for kami kaze attacks. The ohka was essentially a glider, carried underneath a bomber and released near enemy ships. But it packed three minutes' worth of fuel in its tail (along with a 2,600-pound bomb in its nose), so that the suicide pilot could achieve full speed when ramming American ships.The pilots who flew the cherry blossom planes were called the Divine Thunderbolt Corps, and they have installed a plaque explaining (in English as well as Japanese) the purpose of this part of the exhibit: "We, the surviving members of the Divine Thunderbolt Corps, hope this panorama will better explain the selfless acts of our departed comrades, to future generations of the world."About 6,000 Japanese, aged 17 to 30, died in suicide attacks in the war, many during its final weeks, or even after the surrender."The suicide operators, incomparable in their tragic bravery, struck terror in their foes and engulfed the entire country in tears of gratitude for their outstanding loyalty and selfless service," declares another plaque.AdvertisementThe Yasukuni Shrine is, obviously, a sensitive place in Japan, particularly on the anniversary of the end of the war each Aug. 15. Every year there is a controversy about the Cabinet ministers who make a pilgrimage that day to Yasukuni to pay their respects, and other Asian countries were furious in 1985 when Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone formally visited the shrine in his capacity of head of government. In addition, some politicians are urging that Yasukuni be restored to Government control.OFFICIALS at the shrine were uncooperative when I asked them just how a soldier becomes a god. I wanted to know if those soldiers who committed heinous acts such as rape and murder of civilians automatically became deities, or if some acts precluded deification.There was no clear answer, but as far as I could tell any military person, no matter how brutal, became a kami upon death in combat.Officials did note that beside the main building is a small shrine, called Chinreisha, dedicated to all military war dead of any nationality. Chinreisha, built in 1965, is attended by priests from the main shrine. As with Yasukuni, civilian dead are excluded, but American troops killed by Japanese at Pearl Harbor are presumably worshiped as gods at Chinreisha. Similarly, the so-called comfort women -- sex slaves from Korea and other countries whom the Japanese Imperial Army forced to work in front-line brothels -- logically became gods if they died during the war, just as army nurses did.The exhibits at the Yasukuni Shrine vividly recall, approvingly, the enthusiasm that young Japanese had for the war in which so many of them were killed.Those vignettes are troubling, but in the end they are what I found redeeming about the Yasukuni Shrine.It idealizes militarism, but it would also convince almost any person walking through it of the horrors of war. Final letters from a kamikaze pilot: proud and tragicA temporary exhibit on suicide missions in the museum of the Yasukuni Shrine captures the tragedy of the kamikaze pilots and others engaged in such missions. The exhibit, which is scheduled to remain in place at least until the end of the year, focuses on individuals like Toshiro Washimi.AdvertisementMr. Washimi was a 23-year-old navy pilot from Hiroshima. A picture shows him standing with his arms crossed, goggles up, a smooth-skinned young man with the burdens of the nation on his shoulders."I really am grateful for my two decades of life in this beautiful island country," Mr. Washimi wrote in a final letter to his family. "When I fly in the sky, I'm in the purest of minds. I'm genuinely pleased to have the chance to attack the enemy. On this great morning, as I worship His Highness, I shout 'banzai' for the eternity of the Emperor. I will now set off."Mr. Washimi took off on April 6, 1945, flying toward Okinawa, and was never heard from again. It is unclear if he succeeded in crashing into an American ship or if he simply crashed at sea.The temporary exhibit contains scores of pictures and letters of young men like Mr. Washimi. Takashi Kono, a 22-year-old, took off just a day later.Mr. Kono was perhaps more successful, in that he definitely crashed his small plane into an American B-29 bomber, so that both planes crashed.Mr. Kono died, and the caption does not record what happened to the American crew.The letters make wrenching reading. Unfortunately, none are translated, so, if you can, go with a Japanese who can translate for you.The Japanese soldiers were often given a Japanese flag, autographed by friends and neighbors, when they enlisted.The temporary exhibit includes one such flag given to a pilot named Yoshito Sano.  Across the top, someone wrote in careful calligraphy: "May you have the best of luck in the military."Advertisement"First of all, land in Washington!" scrawled a buddy jokingly, and lots of other friends wrote "banzai." Mr. Sano, who died in Okinawa in April 1945, was a jaunty young man, judging from the photo of him in pilot's gear, a scarf around his neck, helmet up, gazing proudly at the camera. NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF If you goAny Tokyo taxi driver knows how to get to the Yasukuni Shrine, or take the subway to the Kudanshita station. Take Exit No. 1, go to the top of the stairs, walk straight for 150 yards and you will be at the shrine entrance.The shrine is open every day from 5 A.M. to 7 P.M., and admission is free. The museum is open every day from 9 A.M. From March through October it closes at 5 P.M. and the rest of the year at 4:30 P.M. Admission to the museum is $2.40, calculated at 84 yen to the dollar.The atmosphere at Shinto shrines is casual, and normal street clothes are commonly worn.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 1995, on Page 5005008 of the National edition with the headline: Where Japan Deifies Its War Dead. 
AMERICAN IDENTITY IS A strange landscape: we're always looking for terra firma and always stumbling onto terra incognita. We know the markers, but we're still trying to figure out how to read them.What is your race or ethnicity; what is your place (inherited or acquired) on the social scale? State your gender and your sexual preferences; name your political affiliations and try to describe (please try) their relationship to the above categories. Would you prefer to move from the city to the suburbs or vice versa? Are you married or otherwise indelibly coupled? If you are single, is that your choice or was it thrust upon you without your consent?The two plays that have just finished spring runs at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, "A Language of Their Own" and "Dog Opera," trumpet these concerns. No, concerns is too tepid a word; better to call them questions and obsessions or irresistible forces and immovable objects. "Sylvia," currently running at the Manhattan Theater Club, seems at first glance to flee such conundrums, but in its own discreet little way it is bewitched, bothered and bewildered by them all.  'Sylvia'The two Americans in search of identities in A. R. Gurney's comic quasi-fantasy "Sylvia" are a late-middle-aged man and a young, frolicsome dog, both hungry for uncomplicated, unconditional love.AdvertisementMr. Gurney divides his time and our attention between the tale of humans and canines that James Thurber used to write -- in which man, woman and beast, each in their mournful but inalienable solitude, matched wills and wits -- and the kind Walt Disney plotted in "Lady and the Tramp," where we watched the animals because they flirted and competed as cleverly and ruthlessly as we like to imagine we do.Sylvia is played by Sarah Jessica Parker as a vivacious mutant: part dog, with some neatly executed dog mannerisms, and part girl-on-the-make, aspiring to be Eve Harrington, Sandra Dee and Courtney Love all at once. As Greg, the late-middle-aged man in the throes of a late-mid-life crisis when he is smitten by Sylvia, Charles Kimbrough provides a steady flow of sternness mixed with haplessness. (If you have seen him play Jim Dial on "Murphy Brown," you know that flow, and it works nicely enough here.) As his wife, Kate, who nearly gets left in the cold because she wants to get rid of Sylvia, Blythe Danner does what little she has to do -- complain, explain, look bemused, then distressed, then tender -- gracefully. Her part seems to have been half-erased before it was even written.Mr. Gurney calls "Sylvia" a romantic comedy, but that isn't really accurate. A good romantic comedy has melancholy as well as sentimentality; it acknowledges complexity even as it tries to charm it away.There is another story at work here that keeps getting erased: the story of a marriage that doesn't know why it exists any more and of a comfortable WASP couple who are losing their moorings. Minor characters help make this clear: a dog-owning acquaintance who knows all about male bonding; a matronly female friend who's trying to go on the wagon; a high-camp therapist who, quite improbably, is consulted by Greg and Kate. These parts are played broadly and funnily by Derek Smith. But they have been written too broadly and too cheaply by Mr. Gurney and directed too broadly and too glibly by John Tillinger.  'A Language Of Their Own'Chay Yew's play opened with two attractive men alone together on a stage as functionally bare as a courtroom. Oscar (played effectively by Francis Jue) wants to break up; Ming (played efficiently enough by B. D. Wong) doesn't. Oscar has AIDS, Ming doesn't. That is the immediate crisis. The broader conflict is that strange mingling of passion, attraction and incompatibility that turns lovers into strangers or mortal enemies but keeps them haunting each other.Like lawyers in court, the two argue and put their case to us. The director, Keng-Sen Ong, stressed this with terse, almost mechanized pacing. He also had the actors deliver their monologues and their dialogue to us and to each other: this is a popular theater strategy these days that needs to be used more sparingly; the analytic distance it imposes can grow as monotonous as earnest naturalism or sentiment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The scenes played out like pieces of conflicting evidence. Ming hurriedly launches himself into a new romance with Robert (played slightly less than efficiently by David Drake), and Oscar slowly accepts a new lover (played wittily but rather too predictably by Alec Mapa) and, still more slowly, acknowledges his approaching death.Have I mentioned that three of the four characters are Asian-Americans? No, and that was by design. What I liked best in "A Language of Their Own" were the moments when the ethnic facts of life were simply part of the landscape, not its raison d'etre -- the irritating differences in outlook between the bilingual Oscar, who was born in China, and the American-born Ming, who can barely place an order in a Chinese restaurant; Oscar's irritation that Robert is white and Robert's self-consciousness about being so single-mindedly attracted to Asian men. I kept thinking that I was seeing two plays in fact: one a schematic exegesis of ethnicity and romance in the 90's, the other a wilder, much more telling inquiry into love, loss, language and the endless process of self-definition.You can read "Porcelain," an interesting early play by Mr. Yew, in the current issue of Performing Arts Journal (No. 48). And you can wait, as I will, for his next play, where I hope he will give (and be encouraged to give) free rein to his multiple languages. 'Dog Opera'AdvertisementThe couple in Constance Congdon's "Dog Opera" speak the language of losers who want to be winners: they want sex and they can't get it. Peter is gay, Madeline is straight, and it doesn't help that they spend most of their time together. They're soul mates in search of bed mates, and it's our task to laugh at their jokes and wince at their pain as they tease, test wits, compare frustration levels and try to top each other in the category of self-mocking wisecracks that verge on self-hatred.Their lives move past them and us in speedy jump-cut episodes: Maddie and Pete cruising futilely at Jones Beach; Maddie and Pete on the phone; Pete meeting a man at a bar; Maddie meeting a lesbian at a bar; Maddie quarreling with her mother; Pete sparring with his father; Maddie quarreling with Pete's father; Maddie failing and failing and failing to find a lover.As written by Ms. Congdon and directed by Gerald Gutierrez, "Dog Opera" was meant to be smart and full of New York attitude. But how hard everybody worked to strike those poses! All that high-strung urban patter we know from plays by Terrence McNally and Wendy Wasserstein, when you career from high culture (Hart Crane and Renaissance art) to pop culture (William Hurt in "Body Heat" and Carmen Miranda) in a single sentence: funkier here, but more forced too.Albert Macklin gave Peter warmth and a touch of rue; we felt that he was thinking between his lines. Kristine Nielsen put Madeline in a state of high-pitched desperation with and between every line. Was this woman anything but manic frustration and deprivation? I think she was meant to be, but Ms. Congdon rushed past just about every chance to make her so. Rick Holmes, Sloane Shelton, Eduardo Andino and Richard Russell Ramos sketched in the gallery of supporting characters with panache, but they were denied the chance to do more than sketch. And, as a clever, vulnerable teen-age whore named Jackie, Kevin Dewey did all he could with speeches that began in canny cynicism and lurched toward patchwork mysticism.I don't believe in beating living writers with the words of dead ones. But Ms. Congdon prefaces her play with the sonnet of Shakespeare's that begins:Let me not to the marriage of true mindsAdmit impediments. Love is not loveWhich alters when it alteration finds,Or bends with the remover to remove.Peter and Madeline, the gay man and the straight woman, are chaste and faithful lovers. A variety of social conventions have put impediments in their way. But their minds and souls -- the scope, the range, the texture of them, everything that would make us care about their fate -- were barely visible. How did Ms. Congdon manage to lose sight of them? SYLVIA Echoes of Thurber and Disney in a this-dog-won't-ever-bite-that-man story.  A LANGUAGE OF THEIR OWN When one play contains the traces of two, it may mean that a third is required.  DOG OPERA Meant to be smart and full of New York attitude, it wasn't.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this review appears in print on June 11, 1995, on Page 2002004 of the National edition with the headline: SUNDAY VIEW; Facts Are Not Always The Sum of Identity. 
This time they came to listen, not to protest. And although some railed against what they called the iniquities of Robert S. McNamara, who as Defense Secretary was a major architect of Vietnam policy under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, it was a much warmer reception than he received the last time he spoke at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.The year was 1966, the height of the Vietnam War. Mr. McNamara was at the university to meet privately with students and faculty and discuss policy in Indochina. Demonstrators threw themselves under his car, and the police led Mr. McNamara away through steam tunnels linking university buildings.But tonight a capacity crowd of more than 1,000 people listened as Mr. McNamara discussed his best-selling confessional memoir, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam" (Times Books), with a panel of faculty members."We were wrong, terribly wrong," Mr. McNamara began, quoting from the book.It was the same face with the same slicked-back hair that had presided over endless televised briefings that confidently projected progress in Vietnam. But now Mr. McNamara apologized. Most of the audience seemed prepared to forgive him.Advertisement"You've got to give him a little credit for trying to understand what happened," said Tom Vallely, a former marine who directs Indochina programs at the Institute for International Development at Harvard.As a panelist, Mr. Vallely recalled for the audience that he was a 19-year-old radio operator for his infantry company near Danang. "I could make night into day" by calling in raids by B-52 bombers, Huey helicopter gunships or naval bombardment, he said. "I could call anybody I wanted."But, he added, "I couldn't call anybody to tell them we were wrong."Part of the difference in the reception tonight was generational. Most of the undergraduates had not been born when the last Americans wereremoved by helicopter from Saigon 20 years ago this week.At a dinner before the talk, the director of the Center for Science and International Affairs at the Kennedy School, Prof. Graham Allison, told Mr. McNamara, "One student said to me recently, 'What is all this passion about Vietnam?' "The student remarked that to him Vietnam was ancient history.In 1966, when protesters shouted down Mr. McNamara, Professor Allison was a graduate student who drove a decoy car trying unsuccessfully to fool demonstrators into following him. Mr. McNamara's primary escort was another graduate student, Barney Frank, now a Democratic Congressman from Massachusetts."I did a lousy job," Mr. Frank said in a telephone interview. "McNamara was enormously gracious, considering I caused a major incident" by not taking better precautions.After their trip through the steam tunnels, Mr. Frank said, he walked the Defense Secretary to his next appointment, the classroom of Prof. Henry A. Kissinger.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The friendly tone expressed toward Mr. McNamara tonight by faculty members also reflects genuine praise for the book, in contrast to the criticism it has received from many reviewers, of both the old anti- and pro-Vietnam War persuasions."On the whole it is an extraordinarily useful and wise book," said Ernest May, a professor of history who teaches a class about America's role in Vietnam. "The lessons are drawn," Professor May said. "I don't know of any other memoir that is so forthright in its confession of error."AdvertisementProfessor May had one reservation. "There is a theology that is missing," he said, explaining that the book does not fully capture the anti-Communist imperative that drove policy makers in the cold war and led them into the Vietnam quagmire. It is like "a crusader's memoir written by a man who can't quite recall why he wants to capture Jerusalem," Professor May said.There were protesters this evening, not students, but Vietnam veterans and families of soldiers who died in Indochina."Your book and your presence is an obscenity," said John Hurley, a combat veteran who is a lawyer here. "There are some indications you had doubts as early as 1965!" Mr. Hurley shouted, demanding to know why Mr. McNamara did not act to stop the war then.As Mr. Hurley pressed on, saying Mr. McNamara never had to look a wounded soldier in the face and tell him, "You have to die for geopolitical reasons," a glint of the old Defense Secretary showed through. "Wait a minute," Mr. McNamara said. "Shut up."But Mr. McNamara was also contrite. Maureen Dunn, the wife of a Navy pilot, Joseph P. Dunn, who was shot down over the Chinese island of Hainan, told Mr. McNamara: "All these years, I've waited. I'd like someone to say to me, 'I'm sorry.' "Mrs. Dunn said she was especially distressed because she had recently received classified documents that described a Cabinet meeting at which Mr. McNamara spoke against trying to rescue her husband. Mr. McNamara had wanted to avoid provoking China, Mrs. Dunn said.Mr. McNamara said he did not remember the meeting. "But," he added, "if I said it I'm not sorry. I'm horrified."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 1995, on Page A00016 of the National edition with the headline: 29 Years Later, McNamara Is Given Warmer Welcome. 
Each had a reason for giving up American citizenship, and each says it had nothing to do with taxes.One man wanted to be a citizen of Israel, the land of his birth. Another was a global marketer who could live anywhere and now calls Belize his home. Still another so loved the balmy Bahamas that he preferred a Bahamian passport to an American one.But each of these expatriate Americans also avoided paying millions of dollars in United States taxes.A loophole in the tax law, one that Congressional Democrats have been trying to close, allows non-citizens to avoid taxes on capital gains and estates. That, critics point out, has permitted a handful of very wealthy Americans who have renounced their citizenship to save millions -- some say billions -- in taxes.Reached in Nassau, Michael D. Dingman, chairman of Abex, a New Hampshire-based maker of aerospace and industrial products, said his expatriation had nothing to do with taxes.Advertisement"I decided to become a Bahamian, and you can't be a Bahamian and a U.S. citizen at the same time," Mr. Dingman said. "It's an honor to be a Bahamian citizen. They have to want you. You can't buy your way in. This is not St. Kitts. The change had nothing to do with taxes."A half-dozen or so of the super-rich, including Mr. Dingman, have been identified over the last six months by The Wall Street Journal and Forbes magazine as among the tax expatriates: Ted Arison, founder of Carnival Cruise Lines, who now lives in Israel; John Dorrance 3d, Campbell Soup heir, who has Irish citizenship: Kenneth Dart, president of the foam cup company Dart Container, now a citizen of Belize; J. Mark Mobius, a leading international money manager, who has German citizenship and lives in Hong Kong and Singapore; Frederick Krieble, a director and former treasurer of the Hartford-based Loctite Corporation, a maker of sealants, who has moved on to the Caribbean, taking up residence in the Turks and Caicos Islands."Expatriation is the ultimate estate plan," said William Zabel, senior partner at Schulte, Roth & Zabel of New York, who is one of the nation's foremost authorities on trusts and estates and is author of "The Rich Die Richer -- And You Can, Too" (William Morrow, 1995). "It's not a complete solution. But if you structure it right, the very few people it affects can save a bundle."Fewer than a thousand Americans a year give up their citizenship, most for reasons that have nothing to do with taxes. But a dozen or more of those who leave are multimillionaires. Aiming at them, President Clinton proposed an expatriation tax in his 1996 budget; the Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation estimates that the tax would raise $3.6 billion over the next decade.But Republicans opposed the provision and succeeded in killing it before Congress began its spring recess last weekend. Now Democrats are eager to revive the issue, and one of them, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, introduced a revised version of the proposal last Thursday and vowed to work for its passage."A genuine abuse exists in this area," said Mr. Moynihan, who noted that some wealthy expatriates, while avoiding taxes, maintained families and homes in the United States by staying within a 120-day-a-year limit on vists here."If you've gotten your riches from America, you should pay your fair share of taxes," said Leslie B. Samuels, Assistant Secretary for tax policy at the Treasury Department. "These expatriates are really like economic Benedict Arnolds. They shouldn't have an unfair advantage over other citizens because they're super-rich."Unlike other countries, which tax on the basis of residence, the United States taxes on the basis of citizenship. Thus, Americans are subject to United States taxation on their worldwide income. In addition, the estate of an American pays taxes at a marginal rate of up to 55 percent of the assets that the citizen owned at death.Advertisement"If you have $50 million, you could certainly potentially save a lot of their estate taxes if you aren't U.S. citizens," said Rich Kohan, director of the personal financial services group of Price Waterhouse. "That's not small change when you're talking in the neighborhood of an estate tax of 55 percent."But Mr. Kohan said that although he had received many queries about the tax benefits of expatriation, none of his clients had decided to divest themselves of their citizenship as a way of avoiding taxes."It's pretty dramatic to give up your citizenship," he said. "First you have to leave the country, and then there is pretty intensive questioning about the purpose of the expatriation."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under current law, a citizen who is even suspected of expatriating for tax reasons can still be taxed for up to 10 years. But the law is like a sieve and has "proven largely ineffective, because departing taxpayers have found ways to restructure their activities to avoid those rules, and compliance is difficult to monitor," a recent Treasury report said."In my case," said Mr. Dingman, who gave up his citizenship last June to live in the Bahamas, "I've been living here in one form or the other since 1964, and that's a long, long time. This is a beautiful place, it doesn't have big social problems, and you don't have big taxes. My wife and I moved here to live a little bit over five years ago, because we wanted a gentle, thoughtful, pleasant place to raise our three children."His wife and children retained their American citizenship, which allows Mr. Dingman to travel freely into and out of the United States.While Mr. Dingman insisted that taxes had played no role in his decision, he said he was sympathetic to those opposed to an expatriation tax."I'm investing money in China and the Czech Republic now," he said. "Why would I want to pay U.S. taxes on money if I invest in China?  Other countries don't do that. And when I die, America says if you die within 10 years of the date you give up citizenship, you have to pay estate taxes. Since I've already paid taxes to get that money, why should my heirs pay taxes on it again?"Tim Gallagher, director of public relations for Carnival Cruise Lines, said its founder, Mr. Arison, had given up American citizenship because he had simply wanted to re-establish citizenship in Israel, where he was born. When it was pointed out that Israel allowed for dual citizenship, Mr. Gallagher could offer no particular reason why Mr. Arison had given up his American passport.AdvertisementThe expatriation tax would treat departees as if they had sold all their assets at fair market value just before renouncing citizenship. Only net gain in excess of $600,000 would be taxed, and so just one or two dozen people a year would be affected.  Real estate and certain pension benefits would be exempted.After intense and acrimonious debate, the proposal died this year in a House-Senate conference on a tax bill. The Senate had passed the expatriate tax but agreed to drop it at the insistence of the House tax-writers, led by Representative Bill Archer, the Texas Republican who heads the Ways and Means Committee.Now the Joint Committee on Taxation will study the issue over the next two months. After it reports in June, the issue is likely to be revived by Congress in the context of hammering out a Federal budget for the next fiscal year.Meanwhile, Democrats and Republicans have continued squabbling over it. Some Republicans compare the tax to the kind of exorbitant exit fees that the old Soviet Union imposed on departing Jews; Democrats accuse Republicans of looking out for the rich even as they slash benefits for the poor.Proponents and critics of the measure marshaled a slew of legal experts to testify on it this winter. They raised issues as varied as constitutional concerns, conflicts with international treaties, double taxation and the question of Cuban-Americans who wished to return to Cuba once Fidel Castro was gone.High-priced lawyers lobbied against the expatriate tax, including former Representaive Guy Vander Jagt, a longtime Republican member of the Ways and Means Committee, who was acting on behalf of an unidentified wealthy expatriate now living in England.The State Department held that none of the concerns were enough to bar an expatriation tax, and the minority Democrats agreed."This proposal," said Representative Sam M. Gibbons of Florida, the ranking Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee, "taxes individuals who are not fleeing economic or political repression but are attempting to shed the normal obligations of citizenship in the developed world."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: Some of Rich Find A Passport Lost Is A Fortune Gained. 
International A3-11  DOLLAR'S SLIDE HALTED  The dollar's slide was halted after Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, called the dollar's tumble, "unwelcome and troublesome" and hinted he might raise American interest rates.  A1SERBIA'S HAND IN ATROCITIES  The C.I.A. has concluded that 90 percent of the acts of "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia were carried out by Serbs and that leading Serbian politicians almost certainly played a role in the crimes. A1  PAKISTAN HUNTS KILLERS OF 2  Pakistan vowed to do everything possible to track down gunmen who killed two Americans from the United States consulate in Karachi. A1  A World Trade Center link? The F.B.I. has dispatched agents. A6  U.S. PRESSES EGYPT ON PACT  Visiting Cairo, Secretary of State Warren Christopher sought to help resolve a dispute between Egypt and Israel that has centered on the treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear arms. The dispute has broad repercussions for the two nations, which made peace in 1979. A3  Arab and Israeli officials met to discuss the fate of refugees. A3  KOREA TALKS OF FLOUTING ACCORD  North Korea threatened to jettison its four-month-old pact with the United States and resume its nuclear program if Washington continued to insist that South Korea build two reactors that have been promised to the North. A6  CHINA AVOIDS RIGHTS REBUKE  China narrowly escaped criticism of its human rights record in a vote by the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva. A5  A Russian nationalist drew criticism for remarks in India.  A7  Delegates to a poverty conference view Africa's needs as urgent. A10  Italy sees a Mafia effort to silence informers vital to prosecutors. A9  Tokyo Journal: Recalling the day in '45 when fire swept the city. A4  National A12-22, A26, B12  BILL LIMITS STOCKHOLDER SUITS  The House passed a bill intended to limit the ability of stockholders to file suits accusing companies or stockbrokers of fraud.  A1  A YOUTH PROGRAM THAT WORKS  The first graduates of a four-year Ford Foundation project to keep inner-city youths in high school is a social policy success.  A1  PRISONERS OF OUR GENES  A new study supports the theory that people's bodies have a natural weight and defy dieting by adjusting metabolism to compensate for a drop in calories.  A1  LAND REVOLT IN THE WEST  A Nevada county where the Federal Government owns 93 percent of the land is the first to be sued by the Justice Department for land use policies designed to undermine Federal control.  A12  NO RESPITE FROM GANG PRESSURE  Even paralyzed and in a wheelchair, Lamar Lewis feels the pressure to be a gang member.  A12  SCIENTIST WINS RELIGION PRIZE  A mathematical physicist won a $1 million prize for his contributions to religious thought and inquiry. A13  SIMPSON DEFENSE THEORY  O. J. Simpson's chief trial lawyer theorized that evidence suggested the victims had been mistakenly killed by drug dealers.  A16  BILL NEGLECTS MILITARY YOUTHS  A Republican bill to replace the Federal school lunch program with state block grants made no provision for the 57,000 children on military bases who eat at school.  A19  ACTION ON POVERTY BILLS  Two House committees approved changes bills that would shift welfare and food stamp programs to the states.  A20  WHITE HOUSE BACKS LABOR  President Clinton issued an order barring the Government from doing business with companies that hire permanent replacement workers during strikes.  A26  A new ethics complaint is filed against Newt Gingrich.  A20  Metro Digest B1  CORRUPTION AT JAVITS CENTER  Asserting that the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center is riddled with corruption, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters seized control of the union local that dispenses many jobs at the center. A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C12-20  A brand-new William Morris Agency.  C13  New documentary magazine.  C18  Music: Christian McBride's jazz.  C16  Julianne Baird.  C17  Dance: Feld and Baryshnikov.  C13  From Merce Cunningham.  C17  Books: "In Love With Daylight," by Wilfrid Sheed C18  Television: Bill Moyers as NBC commentator.  C18  More progeny of 'Cheers.' C20  The Home Section C1-11  A young master of bridge.  C1  Sports B14-19  Baseball: Steinbrenner elevated to executive council.  B19  Basketball: Knicks top Celtics for second straight night.  B15  A wide-open race to Big East tournament title.  B15  Bowling: Small frame, big scores for P.B.A.'s Norm Duke.  B15  Columns: Anderson on baseball B15  Hockey: Point No. 1,000 for Larmer as Rangers defeat Devils.  B15  Obituaries B13  Russell Earl Marker, an organic chemist and expert on hormones.   Paul Horgan, writer.   Norman Rosten, writer.   Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  The city's ailing hospitals.  Arms bazaar expands eastward.  G.O.P. bites elections watchdog.  Correcting cocaine injustice.  Letters  Frank Rich: The Jew world order.  William Safire: Where's the Fingerspitzengefuhl?  Stanley B. Greenberg: Mistaking a moment for a mandate.  Chronicle D26 Bridge C12 Crossword C16We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 1995, on Page A00002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
Buried among the Republicans' sharp cost-cutting proposals to balance the Federal budget is the swift dismantling of two of the Clinton Administration's most prominent economic innovations: the use of the Government to promote exports and the underwriting of new technologies that corporate America considers too risky.During his Presidential campaign, Mr. Clinton briefly called those strategies "industrial policy," until Republicans seized on the phrase as proof that Mr. Clinton wanted the Government to meddle in the workings of the market. Once in office, the White House dropped the terminology but went ahead anyway with an aggressive program, declaring that the United States needed to develop partnerships with industry and use Government pressure to promote exports, two skills that Japan and Germany turned into an art after World War II.The Republican budget proposals would bring many of those efforts to a halt and drastically shrink others, from the Energy Department to the Pentagon. The most sweeping cutback proposal, the "The Department of Commerce Dismantling Act," is scheduled to be introduced on Tuesday by House Republicans. The act would immediately terminate six of the Cabinet department's offices and slice up the organization that provides the skills for trade negotiations with Japan, China and several other nations.Many functions of the Commerce Department's highest-profile organization, the International Trade Administration, would be carved up or eliminated. It is unclear what would happen to the economic "war room" that calls in ambassadors, Cabinet secretaries and sometimes the President to put pressure on foreign governments to buy American goods.AdvertisementCuriously, the White House has said almost nothing in public about the attack on the core of its economic strategy, partly for fear that it would detract from its warnings about proposed cuts to Medicare and other popular social programs."We've talked through what is the best approach, and the decision was to stay focused on the programs that most people understand," said Hazel R. O'Leary, the Secretary of Energy, whose department's budget would shrink by roughly $7 billion over the next five years."It's a little early," said Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the head of the National Economic Council, an office that was created at the start of the Administration to give economics equal weight with issues of national security. "There should be a good debate about the wisdom of this, but it is still early in the budget process."It may be early, but it seems clear that most of the trade and technology promotion programs will be sharply reduced, if they survive at all.As a result, the White House's reticence has not kept the departments themselves from starting all-out survival campaigns. Capitol Hill these days is flooded with under secretaries and assistant secretaries explaining and justifying programs that have never before come under intense scrutiny.Many of those programs were started under Republican administrations. The theme of the presentations often boils down to one argument: In an age of economic conflict, cutting out political and economic support for industry is the equivalent of unilateral disarmament."Our global competitors are laughing at us," Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown said today in a telephone conversation from Paris, where he is attending a meeting of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. "Just at the moment when we've finally learned that there is no way to win without a public-private partnership, without getting the Government involved in promoting a nation's exports, people are incredulous that Congress would be doing this.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."The French are apoplectic that we have been so pro-active and successful," Mr. Brown said, a reference to Washington's role in winning a huge contract in Brazil last year over French competition. "And now they are delighted that we are thinking about not doing it anymore."The Republican theory is that the Commerce Department has become a brazen example of "corporate welfare," a term coined by one of Mr. Clinton's Cabinet members and close friends, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich. To the White House's horror, the phrase -- which Mr. Reich has not repeated since -- has become a rallying call for the freshman class of Republicans, who do not share their party's traditional closeness or dependence on big business.Advertisement"There are 19 different departments in the Government that deal with trade," said Representative Dick Chrysler, the Michigan Republican who drafted the legislation to dismantle the Commerce Department 92 years after its creation. "They could all be reduced to a single Department of Trade."Another target of Mr. Chrysler's is the department's Advanced Technology Program, which provides backing for technologies that small companies -- and some large ones -- consider promising but too risky to attempt. "This has grown from $10 million in 1990 to $250 million in 1993, and now they want $750 million," Mr. Chrysler said. "This is nothing other than picking winners and losers."Such arguments underscore the sharp difference in the way technology and trade policy is dealt with in Washington and in the capitals of its major economic competitors, where trade is considered national security and "picking winners and losers" is a phrase with no political resonance.In Japan and Germany, there is virtually no debate over government programs to provide seed money for risky technologies or to use the influence of top officials to win contracts. It is taken as a given that such roles fall to the central government, along with defending the nation's territory and making foreign policy.In Japan, for example, officials will freely acknowledge that more than 50 percent of the money committed to new technologies will result in utter failure. But even a 20 percent success rate, they argue, should be considered a success. No one would even attempt such an argument in Washington."You can't go up on the Hill and talk about a 40 percent success rate, even if that is a brilliant performance," Ms. O'Leary said last week. "People will say: 'What? We are throwing away 60 percent?"Instead, Ms. O'Leary's department has been churning out news releases about its industrial breakthroughs in energy conservation. A giant sulfur lamp now hangs over the Energy Department's entrance on Constitution Avenue, a single light that replaces 250 bulbs. "It was developed with $1 million in Government money and much more in private funds," she said. "That is hardly a waste."On the Hill, though, no one wants to talk about sulfur lamps, unless they are designed to illuminate a balanced budget. "This is the tail-wagging-the-dog syndrome," Mr. Chrysler said. "If it is a good invention, let the private sector invent it."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: COMPANY NEWS; Clinton's Aid To Industry Is A G.O.P. Target. 
InternationalA day after the United States imposed trade sanctions against China, some American companies said that they were preparing to switch production from China to sites in other Asian nations, while others waited and said that they expected a resolution of the dispute.  [ Page A1. ]For the better part of a year, China's leaders, notably President Jiang Zemin, have assumed that President Clinton was willing to overlook a great deal in trade, human rights and other issues. But that strategy has repeatedly proved wrong.  [ A1. ]As India emerges from 40 years of socialist economics, American companies have become leading investors in many areas, from power plants and telephone systems to ventures that will provide new choices in breakfast cereal, computers and soft drinks.  [ D1. ] The EconomyAfter 15 months of robust growth, the American economy is beginning to slow. But no one yet knows whether the slowdown will turn out to be only a lull or the beginning of a slide toward much slower growth, if not recession.  [ D1. ]AdvertisementAs President Clinton lays out a five-year budget plan today, including a bid to shave $144 billion more from Federal spending, the Republican-led Congress is preparing to raise him several hundred billion dollars.  [ A1. ]Farm subsidies are center stage in a political battle in Congress like few before.  [ A1. ]Profit margins at most hospitals declined or stagnated last year, reflecting the pressure to reduce costs. And health care executives said many hospitals would be under even greater pressure in 1995 if Congress enacted proposals that would slash spending for medical care for the elderly and poor.  [ D1. ]Sweatshops flourish again in New York City, more than a century after Jacob Riis chronicled dangerous conditions and exploitive labor practices in apparel factories on the Lower East Side.  [ A1. ] The Media BusinessA sharp jump in newsprint prices has forced newspapers to cut other costs, including the size of their staffs. And newspaper executives have begun asking why the cost of their primary raw material is rising so rapidly.  [ D1. ]Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dismissed by some as a backwater for aging baby boomers with passe music taste, VH1 has recently been repositioned as a channel for "MTV graduates."  [ D6. ]Several magazines are trying to cater to the baby boomers' newest interest: home gardening.  [ D6. ]Film studios have become ever more eager in their efforts to snatch up book manuscripts, sometimes even before a publishing contract is in place. Mary B. W. Tabor: Publishing.  [ D6. ]Omnicom Group's purchase of Chiat/Day, one of the last independent creative forces in advertising, proves the industry's consolidation progresses. Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ] CompaniesPatrick G. Hays takes over today as head of the national Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, as Americans increasingly switch to health maintenance organizations and other managed-care alternatives to traditional insurance.  [ D8. ] Today's ColumnsMutual and pension funds appear to be big losers among United States investors in the Mexican peso's sharp slide. The pain may spread if Mexico's markets fall further. Market Place.  [ D1. ]Three professors have a new way to design a building intended to withstand seismic shocks. Teresa Riordan: Patents.  [ D2. ]We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: BUSINESS DIGEST. 
India and the United States signed a military accord today that both sides described as marking a break with the estrangements of the cold-war era and as a move toward enhanced stability in South Asia, an area long troubled by strains between India, Pakistan and China.Washington and New Delhi are strengthening ties that were frayed for long periods between India's independence in 1947 and the collapse of the Soviet Union, a close ally of India's, in 1991. On several fronts, particularly in the expansion of business and economic ties, the United States has now become India's most important partner.The military agreement involves no breakthrough; specifically, it does not resolve United States concerns about tensions between India and Pakistan and indications that both countries have secret nuclear weapons programs. The nuclear issue is not mentioned in the accord.But William J. Perry, the United States Secretary of Defense, said here today that the agreement would open what he called "a new era in our security relations." The accord provides for consultations between the Pentagon and India's Defense Ministry, as well as joint military exercises, military training, defense research and weapons production.Advertisement"For more than four decades, all during the cold war, the relationship between the United States and India was cool and even in some cases strained," Mr. Perry said after a ceremony at which he signed the accord with the Home Minister, Shankarrao B. Chavan. "This agreement by itself doesn't achieve anything, but it does open the door."After strains worsened last year over the nuclear weapons issue and India's battle against separatists in Kashmir, Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao visited Washington in May and smoothed over the differences with President Clinton.Mr. Chavan said the accord reflected a mutual desire "to come closer together and forget the past." Mr. Rao, who holds the defense portfolio, is to meet Mr. Perry on Friday. The Secretary is also to visit army and air force units before leaving for Washington on Saturday.In another measure of the quickening pace of rapport, Mr. Perry is to be followed to the Indian capital this weekend by Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown, who is to take part in ceremonies marking several trade and investment deals with United States companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For decades India has been suspicious of the United States' military aims and resentful of Washington's close military ties with Pakistan, India's principal rival.Before arriving here Mr. Perry visited Pakistan and told the Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, that Washington intended to take an even-handed approach to Pakistan and India, American officials said.The visit to Pakistan produced an agreement to revive consultation among senior military officials, which had been dormant since the United States suspended military aid to Pakistan in 1990 because of its objections to Pakistan's nuclear program. Under the new agreement, military officials are to exchange intelligence and arrange joint exercises and training programs.Another country watching closely for any broadening of military ties between India and the United States has been China, which has a 2,250-mile frontier with India and a close relationship with Pakistan.While India and China have been moving to ease military tensions along contested parts of the frontier, United States officials, with an eye to China, said the military agreement signed in New Delhi was "not aimed at anyone," as one official put it. Chinese officials had welcomed it, the Americans added, and they stressed the limits on what India and the United States could achieve under the agreement.Washington has shifted its emphasis away from getting India to limit its nuclear program, and toward efforts to persuade India and Pakistan not to deploy short-range missiles that could carry nuclear warheads.AdvertisementAmerican officials also said the agreement would respect the laws and policies of the two countries, an allusion to United States bans on the sale or transfer of sensitive military technology to countries -- India among them -- that have declined to sign the international treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 1995, on Page A00012 of the National edition with the headline: U.S.-India Pact on Military Cooperation. 
ON A FRIDAY IN JULY, TWO DAYS BEFORE the new musical "Victor/Victoria" opened in Chicago, members of the company were running around the catacombs of the Shubert Theater, trying to figure out whether the next day was Blake Edwards's birthday. Theater people take these things seriously. Birthday lists are prominently posted, and the last member of the company to have one organizes the next celebration. The bulletin board listed July 26 -- the following Wednesday -- next to the director's name, but an assistant to Edwards's wife, Julie Andrews, said his birthday was the 22d, tomorrow. Actors and assistants panicked. Kirsten Sanderson, an assistant director, went to get an almanac. The  actor Adam Heller went out to a bookstore. Nobody was keen on asking the director directly. Heller, with whom the farceur Edwards shared great rapport, dreaming up new pratfalls for his performance nearly every rehearsal, had already approached him on stage. "Hey, Blake, I hear it's your birthday Saturday." Edwards had responded with an unprintable expression of two words.The occasion was loaded because Edwards was turning 73, and though he's a proudly physical man, he seemed old. He had a torn Achilles' tendon that he'd recently aggravated and that was unlikely ever to fully repair; he humped along  with a cane. Others in the company sprang down the steps at the side of the Shubert's stage, but Edwards had to hand himself down two feet to a step. Being  around the company, I heard murmurings that his talent was fading. Once he had made hit movies; now he was recycling his last real Hollywood smash, the film "Victor/Victoria" (and recycling the arthritic servant's shaky china bit he used in "10" for the musical's first act).This week "Victor/Victoria" will open in previews at the Marquis Theater on  Broadway. It should be a historic and joyous occasion: Julie Andrews's return after more than 30 years' absence to the venue that made her ("My Fair Lady," "Camelot"). Time after time Broadway has entreated Andrews to return and Andrews has pleaded her film career or the demands of bringing up children.  But those movie roles have been largely forgettable (the psychiatrist, for instance in "The Man Who Loved Women") and meanwhile, Andrews has also seemed at times to neglect the source of her earliest fame, her shimmering voice. Today is her 60th birthday. The avid fans known as show queens are keen to find out: Is Andrews still magic on stage?I followed the show for four months, from the early reads in Manhattan to the out-of-town runs in Minneapolis and Chicago, spending days in the rehearsal hall or theater while dancers playing transvestites held ice packs to toes crushed by high heels. The Andrews question held little interest backstage because the answer was obvious: when she sings, she's magic. So I watched her husband. Blake Edwards is an American comic legend. He has done 51 films in all -- in his youth, splendid pictures like "Breakfast at Tiffany's," "The Days of Wine and Roses" and "Operation Petticoat," followed by terrifically funny (and terrifically successful) "Pink Panther" movies, starring the late Peter Sellers.AdvertisementBut Edwards has always been famously headstrong. He stormed away from Hollywood, raging over one thing after another; there were big, foolish lawsuits. The films got weaker. At times he seemed bent on destroying not only his own career but also his wife's. And now he was taking on a project that intimidates people half his age, directing a new Broadway musical, and that for  the first time in his life.One of the recurring themes of Edwards's films is the crisis of an aging, self-conscious man, and being around "Victor/Victoria" as it made its way to New York was like viewing such a movie. How lost is he? Why does he keep changing things? Does Edwards even belong on Broadway? Only now, in retrospect, do these  questions seem unfair."VICTOR/VICTORIA" begins rehearsals late in March in a space that Michael Bennett once used, 890 Broadway, at 19th Street. I take a metal chair at the side of the room with a good view of the director's table and the actors. Edwards says very little, he watches and only gets up to direct physical bits. He doesn't like the way the actors throw their punches. He wanders out among them making a fist with his right hand and caressing it with his left."You can do a real roundhouse here," he says. "John Wayne would start from way back here, he would bring it in from downtown."Edwards dresses like a successful artist, in quiet knit shirts and a scarf, in flowing dark pants. He's given to long, stony silences and bloody-cheeked gazes that are unnerving.  Privately the actors tell me how slowly the rehearsal process is going. I'm dismayed by the show's humor. The jokes are broad -- Julie Andrews repeatedly sings high notes that cause bottles to break. Rachel York, the blonde whom the producers hope will emerge a star, reads, "A feloonious attempt to defrock the public." Several lines depend on references to Shakespeare. Now and then there are elegant glints, but a lot of it is tired. "How did we do this in the movie?" Edwards says.The movie was daring for its time, 1982. Set in Paris in the 1930's, it starred Andrews as a 40-ish but gamine English soprano, "Victoria Grant," who becomes destitute and falls in with a gay showman, played by Robert Preston. Preston has a vision of his friend reborn as a Polish count and female impersonator. Through this artifice, Grant gains stardom and love -- until the closet begins to feel suffocating."THERE WAS A Shakespeare," Julie Andrews says one day on break, snugging up  her purple leg warmers. "I knew one. In vaudeville. Billy Shakespeare."Usually she wears designer jeans and a white shirt, but today she has on blue leotards. You can see what great legs she has. There's an elastic supporter on her right knee; when she came in after lunch, Edwards said, "How was the M.R.I.?"AdvertisementShe frowned. "I didn't hear any tear or pop but there's a little tear there,  and it was swollen.""Let's be careful so it doesn't get bigger," he said, and when she sat down on the prop couch next to him he stroked her left thigh.Everything rides on Andrews, and eight performances a week is going to be a brutal workout. That's just one reason they're doing four months out of town, a  $1-million-plus budget item: so that Andrews will get in shape for Broadway. She will then be committed to the show for a year in New York, or if it does not recoup its $8.5 million capitalization -- that is, if the houses do not exceed about 75 percent of capacity -- a year and a half. It's a form of indenture that reflects the difficulty independent producers have raising money for a new Broadway show. As "Victor/ Victoria" struggled to get financing, some on Broadway, leery of Hollywood interlopers, questioned whether it would ever open. Its two general partners were Edwards's production company (Edwards put up, by one account, $2 million) and Polygram Diversified Entertainment ($1.75 million). Then a year ago Polygram withdrew as a general partner, though it kept its stake. As the producers scrambled to rewrite the deal, they postponed the show's opening from last spring until now.Another reason they're spending so much time and money out of town is so Edwards can learn the ways of musical theater. Now and then around the rehearsal space I hear mutterings from company members about whether Edwards can make the  transition. He's a film director who is used to building a story with cuts. But  in theater you can never split the focus. One day I hear Edwards say, "Let's try that shot again."He's propped against the director's table with his hand draped over an open  candy tin, the gray stone ring on his pinkie glinting. There are tons of sweets  around the set. Gummi Bears and coffee cake from Zabar's, Olivers (biscuits and  chocolate). Does sugar help people conquer fears? People in the show know how skeptical some in the New York theater crowd are about the project. The line within show circles is that Edwards is trying to gin up his career in a new medium, and that the show could well be a disaster. "Victor/ Victoria" has so much going against it. Movies rarely make successful Broadway musicals. (For every "Sunset Boulevard" there's a "Red Shoes" and a "Goodbye Girl.")Moreover, Henry Mancini, Andrews and Edwards's dear friend, had done a Broadway musical before writing the score for this one. Then Mancini died last year. Who will be there to make the songs work as "Victor/ Victoria" grinds toward the Great White Way?Meanwhile, Edwards tinkers, and reminisces about a Hollywood boyhood spent around the likes of W. C. Fields."I remember this time Fowler's wife" -- that's the writer Gene Fowler -- "wouldn't let him go out, she didn't want him to get drunk," he says. "Barrymore said, 'If you won't let Gene out to play, I will [expletive] on your living-room rug.' He said it in a Shakespearean way. And then she came out and he was doing  it."ONE OF THE BEST FIGHT DIRECTORS in the business, B. H. Barry, veteran of Shakespeare and London's West End, comes into 890 Broadway to stage the fight in the second act. But it turns out Edwards has plenty of fight in him and he blows off most of Barry's staging. When his wife throws a punch, Edwards lurches up from his metal chair. "Darling, don't do this, do it like this."AdvertisementAndrews has been holding her fist palm up as she clenches it; he wants her to straighten it out, thumb knuckle up. She's in drag: she must not give away that  she is really a woman.On break I glimpse Andrews throwing prop cigarettes in a box. She has taken them out of the box and filled her hand and is absently practicing a gesture in  which she throws them back. One snap of her hand and they all go perfectly into  the box, lined up and stacked. There is something so seamless about her style; you can't forget that she grew up in English music halls, a leggy kid from a broken home outshining her mother and stepfather in their own calling, at 12 a star with a fluky four-octave range.My friends all ask what Julie Andrews is really like. Lovely. She pulls me into a smaller room to hear the overture, she offers me sweets. "You must try those black currant ones, they're delicious," she says, carrying over a fancy metal box of black currant pastilles. I take one. "No, you have to have two to get the taste."I watch the little skirmishes between her and her husband and find myself siding with Andrews. Edwards is sometimes brittle and impatient with her. "I know what you're going to say and I'm pretty sure I'm not going to agree with you."She is respectful and apologetic. "I don't mean to be difficult," she says."Sorry darlings, I got that line wrong. . . . "Now and then she remonstrates with his direction but always gently. "Can I ask something? I know it's really stupid."Andrews's romance with Edwards began in the late 1960's, when she was the biggest moneymaker in Hollywood, a star in a series of hits, from "Mary Poppins" to "Thoroughly Modern Millie." Then, in 1968, came "Star!" in which the creative team that had done "The Sound of Music" regrouped to dramatize the life of the English performer Gertrude Lawrence. But the movie was such a commercial and critical failure that it was withdrawn from the theaters, then recut and rereleased. Meanwhile, Andrews managed to alienate a lot of her public by not showing up for the movie's London premiere. She said she was needed on the set of a Blake Edwards film, "Darling Lili," a spy movie and musical that was grossly overbudget and that also went nowhere.Andrews's first marriage, at age 23, had been to the genial Tony Walton, a set designer of about the same age who was sometimes referred to as "Mr. Julie Andrews." Edwards, whom she married in 1969, was 13 years her senior and anything but genial. He fought with MGM over cuts made in "Wild Rovers" and "The Carey Treatment" and then left Hollywood for Europe, telling The Los Angeles Times, "I'm banishing myself." Before long he was back. In the mid-70's he did three "Pink Panther" sequels that were big hits and followed them with "10."AdvertisementThe long-suffering girlfriend in that picture was played by Andrews. In his next movie, "S.O.B.," she played a goody-goody star who bares her breasts in a film to help a producer at war with the studios. She seemed to be using her stardom to nurture Edwards's career. Andrews said that family mattered more to her than career. She and Edwards had adopted two girls, and she had also written children's books under the name Julie Edwards.THEY FINALLY DO A runthrough in late April, and for the first time it looks  like a show. At moments it's even funny. The most excited person on the fourth floor is Tony Adams, who is Edwards's longtime production partner. During the break, he smokes a cigarette in the back corridor and talks in a rapid-fire Dublin lilt about how Henry Mancini could produce a movie theme in minutes.Adams is 42. He has a beautiful face, coldly bedeviling green eyes, fine clothes and shoes. His nearly desperate drive was the biggest motor in moving the project to Broadway. He told Edwards it was pointless to keep paying yearly  options on the theatrical rights to "Victor/ Victoria" if he wasn't going to do  something with it. And Adams as much as anyone convinced Andrews that this was the right way to return to Broadway. The issue was forced by Andrews's age -- in a few years the role would be both too demanding and patently inappropriate. Another factor was Edwards's exile from the studios after a couple of flops. "Year after year," a critic for The London Times wrote in 1992, "Blake Edwards keeps ploughing ahead, but with rancid sex farces that help dismantle the reputation he built with the early 'Pink Panther' comedies and 'Days of Wine and Roses.' " His last movie was a pathetic effort to restrike an old match: "Son of the Pink Panther.""He can always get a movie cobbled together," Adams tells me. "But Hollywood  is very youth-culture oriented. There's little respect for a body of work or how someone has learned his craft. It is presumed that you have lost it."     AT THE BEGINNING OF MAY, "Victor/Victoria" moves to Minneapolis, to the Historic Orpheum Theater, and begins rehearsing like mad, 10 hours between noon  and midnight.Who can understand Edwards's method? He fusses endlessly over one-liners and  ignores larger problems. There is a giant hole in the first act where a stunt is supposed to take place. The plan was to do it the same way as the movie, with a  guy balanced upside down on a bottle that breaks. But it is too acrobatic for the stage.So it is just a hole, but Edwards sits in the aisle next to Row M, working on small moments. I sit a few seats away from him. There are always three or four people around the director, getting him Snapple, taking notes, humoring him. He  mixes machismo and confession in a way that I find beguiling.  During a break he tells about working with Cary Grant on the 1959 war movie "Operation Petticoat.""That was the time he had gone to an analyst in Hollywood who told him he should do LSD as a form of analysis. So he was a lunatic on the set and I didn't say anything till one day I lost it. The only one who was surprised was me. I said, 'All right you, [expletive], I've had enough.' And I started across the deck of the submarine and four stagehands grabbed me and lifted me off and on to a little boat and we went out to sea. And I didn't get back till 4 in the morning. They got me drunk to save me. I was so drunk that when we came back I bought a Ferris wheel. I said, 'I'll buy that Ferris wheel, free rides for everyone.'"And right after that he did a movie with Doris Day, 'That Touch of Mink.' And she came to me, she was very well mannered, she could never say anything bad about anyone. She said, 'How was he on your movie?' and I didn't say anything. Because he wanted to go out buying purses with her. So they went out buying purses."Advertisement"Couldn't the producers say, 'No LSD'?" I say."He was the producer. But I can't fault him, it was a great movie for me, that was where I reached the next level, I got to do what I wanted.""You have a lot to thank those stagehands for," I say.He rubs his big old hands. "They had to physically take me off that submarine. And back then I might have done some damage."     ANDREWS COMES OFF THE stage and strides up the aisle toward her husband."What are we going to do about tonight," she says, referring to dinner plans. "It's the first time I'm asking you today.""No, it's the 10th time," he says."Today?" she says."Second time.""No, first.""Just then was the first," he says."Don't kill the messenger, but I have to make a reservation."But she goes away with the matter unresolved, and a little later his assistant comes running up and falls at his feet, smiling, to follow up on the reservation question. Edwards tyrannizes people with his ferocious introversion. His moods and his dark sense of humor are the sources of his nickname: Blackie.SHOW TIME IS TWO WEEKS OFF AND there seems to be a power struggle between Edwards and the choreographer, Rob Marshall. Marshall is experienced in musical  theater, having done "Kiss of the Spider Woman" and "Damn Yankees," and he is much more controlling and present than Edwards. You hear him saying things like  "sugar her off" about sweetly getting someone into line. "Elephants!" he cries when six female dancers come down too hard on a leap. He moves up and down the aisle with a microphone as Edwards sits with his cane by Row M. There is some murmuring; later that day there is a microphone for Edwards, too. Two mikes, two directors. How long can this last?I notice a dapper man asleep at a drafting table in Row H, and I introduce myself. He's Robin Wagner, the well-known set designer, and he's devilish, gossipy. He tells me which actors are the worst scenery-chewers, I tell him my doubts about the show."You know I got interested in following this when the insiders said it had all the makings of an $8 million fiasco, a la 'Red Shoes,' " I say.Advertisement"This is why I stopped reading the papers," he says. "Everything is so negative.""Disaster's a much better story," I say."There was nothing in 'Red Shoes.' It was awful. Did you see it?  I saw it. It was treacly -- you had to be 6 years old to appreciate that."I GO BOWLING IN SOUTH Minneapolis with Tony Adams and Andrews's understudy, Anne Runolfsson. Adams drinks alcohol-free beer and entertains us. In his richly patterned vest, Adams is always into one piece of Irish luck or another. Dining  with Ted Kennedy. Renting J. P. Donleavy's old apartment.Adams has been married twice and has three children but his real family seems to be Edwards and Andrews. He started working for them when he was in his late teens; he drove their children to school and took classes at Pepperdine. He never graduated; by 21 he was producing Edwards's movies and helping to run the  family finances. The couple are quite dependent on Adams. He protects both of them, sometimes -- it seems -- from each other. When a scene change leaves Andrews fumbling for a robe to cover her body in the dark, when her climatic song ("the 11 o'clock number," in show parlance) is staged with her wearing boxer shorts and a man's shirt, it's Adams who steps in to say, This won't do.A couple of days later Adams is sitting in an orchestra seat in the darkened  house next to a guy with a lot of hair. Then he gets up and comes over to me in  the dark."You know who that is? Donny Osmond. He's doing 'Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat' across the street. His dream is to be in a Blake Edwards  movie.""What's Blake's dream?" I say.He laughs. "To direct a Blake Edwards movie."I slide in next to Osmond. He puts down a cellular phone. He says he can see  that the show is coming together."I read a very interesting thing in a psychology book yesterday," he whispers. "Before you get on a roller coaster, there's no one in your seat. They let the last people off in a different spot from where you get in. That's because you feel let down if you're going somewhere where you end up in the same place you began. But when it's empty it's fresh, it's new, it's yours. That's what show business has to do, it's bigger than life."AdvertisementANDREWS COMES STRIDING UP the aisle toward the entourage around her husband.  "I have the itchiest hands, what is that?""It means you're going to make a lot of money," says her understudy, Runolfsson."Oh good, let it pour in.""Doesn't that mean you're going to kiss a fool?" Edwards says. "If you have an itchy nose maybe --""What does it mean if you have an itchy here?" Andrews scratches at the zipper of her blue jeans."It means you're going to get paid for kissing a fool," he says.ON MAY 17, WE FILE ONTO A bus outside the Orpheum and take I-94 to the Ordway Music Theater in St. Paul for what is called a sitzprobe, the occasion when the performers finally sing before a whole orchestra. It's the first time anyone has seen sunlight in days. "That's the Mississippi River," Richard B. Shull, one of the principals, says. Other members of the company look blankly out the window.We get to the Ordway and Edwards is in the back hallway accompanied by the show's lyricist, Leslie Bricusse, the man who wrote "What Kind of Fool Am I?" He has a cloud of silver hair and a continental air. Bricusse has spent time at the Edwards chalet in Gstaad, where, he has told me, Andrews is just like Mary Poppins, making sure everyone is taken care of. The director is having trouble with the dollar-bill changer at the Ordway. He keeps slipping the bill in wrong  and getting flummoxed and turning it around. He doesn't mind who sees him, and I'm reminded of his removal from all minor pecuniary struggles. Back in the 80's, when Edwards became embroiled in multimillion-dollar lawsuits against MGM-United Artists over the promotion of "The Trail of the Pink Panther," "The Curse of the Pink Panther" and "Victoria/ Victoria," his own family's expenses for the making of "Victor/Victoria" briefly became an embarrassment. It was reported that his son by a previous marriage, Geoffrey, an assistant editor on the film, had an $82,000 living allowance, and that Edwards had bought a Rolls Royce with the help of a $46,000 car allowance.But even rich men can have troubled emotional lives. Edwards's films have demonstrated that -- in "10," for instance, Dudley Moore drives a Rolls but still sees his identity collapse. The director's own agonies are well known. He  was in analysis for decades, for years he suffered from chronic fatigue syndrome and from paralyzing depressions during which he says Andrews had to take him for walks like a child and he talked to his therapist about killing himself. Antidepressants, he has told me, helped him get past that period.The sitzprobe begins. The orchestra is on stage, and Andrews mounts the stage wearing a sand-colored pants suit. She struggles through "The Victoria Variations," the ragged ballad about life in show business that is her first number. The lines are tortured. "Like crime I think that opera does not pay. . . .  Dumped into a convent, not a lot of fun, did I have a future, none except being a nun."Andrews falters a couple times, and they start the song over again. This time as she sings she keeps her left hand shoved deep in the left-hand pocket of her  suit jacket. She has something in there that her hand fusses with. You can see the fingers scrabbling like a trapped animal as she tries to negotiate the awful lyrics. Are they worry beads? Her clip-on earrings? No one will ever know. Still, her fingers clutch desperately as she hurtles through the ballad. When Andrews is done she comes off the stage with a radiant smile.AdvertisementOVER THE NEXT WEEK, WITH AN audience looming, Andrews grows more fretful. Backstage is filled with humidifiers to keep the dust down, and an exploding-cigar gag goes because the smoke is too much for her throat. You hear  grousing, but how can anyone fault her? She has a $15 million voice and body to  protect. That's how big the presale is back in New York, all on her name.Perhaps because he knows how dependent he is on his wife, Edwards seems casually cruel to her. We're on stage when he's readying another gag, an umbrella exploding."Blake, what's that?" Andrews says."It's to scare hell out of you.""It's working.""It's for a gag, darling, it's for a set up. It has nothing to do with you."Her eyes dart around. "Is it a huge noise, gang? I shall wet my pants.""I tell you it's not a huge noise," says Edwards.She does a humorous sag. "Yeah, trust you. Yeah.""They only used about a hundred pounds of fertilizer."Of course, Andrews's style has always been marked by polite indirectness. "The iron butterfly" was one nickname. I start keeping count in my notes of all  the times she apologizes for herself. "Can I just say something?" "So sorry." "Sorry. I was late on that." "Sorry. I got a cramp halfway through." "Sorry. So  sorry." "I'm sorry to be such a pain about this. . . . " "I'm terribly sorry but we have to decide which lyrics are being used."I GO TO A STEAKHOUSE for dinner with Tony Roberts, who plays the gay cabaret singer, and he describes a terrible nightmare. He was in a car crossing a border within the United States when men in leather jackets carrying guns stopped him.  His mother was in the front seat, an actors' union executive who has a big mouth was in the back seat. Roberts was terrified that someone would say the wrong thing."I thought it was the end," he says. "And I'm thinking, 'Should I say something or not?' "We share a pile of cheesecake and head back to the theater. I don't say so, but the dream seems obvious. The musical veterans in the show are worried that Edwards is dragging them to their perdition. But they're scared to say boo.AdvertisementThe purists get a fresh scare when Edwards's assistant, Kirsten Sanderson, comes in with a video that some vaudeville-act booker in New York sent her to try to plug the hole in the first act where there was a stunt in the movie. Edwards goes crazy over the act. He keeps bringing people over to the TV at the  lighting desk to watch "The Balloon Man." A small man with long curly hair inflates a giant balloon and somehow gets inside it and bounces around, before exploding it. The devotees of musical comedy walk away from the video with ashen faces.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leslie Bricusse goes back to New York to work on his own show, "Jekyll and Hyde," but he faxes line changes for "The Victoria Variations." Andrews has such trouble remembering them that she keeps "going up," the theater expression for forgetting lines. She tapes big pieces of paper to the face of the orchestra pit with the clumsy lines on them. "I'm accustomed to stress. . . . I've no friends and no future. . . ."A joke goes around the company: the wrong composer died. Smart people inside  a company know what's wrong with a show. They know which songs are off, which performances are over the top. Nothing a critic says will surprise them. They only pray that the producers heed the red flags and have the courage to change things.ONE NIGHT WE STAY IN THE theater late watching Andrews sing while they work  on lighting. There are only a dozen of us and she carries a giant cup of tea around the stage. She sings "My Funny Valentine." Everyone is quiet. She's so guarded and formal in life, but when she sings her sweet, sad soul comes out and rummages in yours. In the darkness someone sighs, "Killer, boy."Andrews comes to the lip of the stage. "It's funny how you don't know the lyrics," she says brightly."You don't have to," Wagner says.After that she does another Rodgers and Hart tune, "Spring Is Here."Rob Marshall says out loud, "One lady and one spotlight, that's what we're waiting for all night, honey.""As long as I have a cup of tea I'm happy for hours," Andrews says."How about some Sondheim?" Adam Heller calls up from the darkness."Got anything?" Then she does, "Being Alive."Kirsten Sanderson, the assistant director, cries out, "We love you, Julie Andrews."AdvertisementPoor Julie, we all love her as the sweet, generous mother we never had. She wanted that adoration, and grew to be such a narcissistic prisoner of our love it's no wonder she threw herself on a heavy like Blackie Edwards and withdrew. On her own she's helpless to demand what's hers.  She must never seem selfish. I remember a moment back at 890. A singer on another floor was doing scales, her voice came in the open window from the air shaft. Andrews walked to the window and shut it in irritation. "Every day I hear her singing," she muttered.Then she turned back to the room and smiled. "Oh, but she's very good," she said.THE BALLOON MAN, HILLEL Gitter, breaks an engagement in Israel and flies to  Minneapolis from Europe the day before the first preview. He does his act on stage with a blue balloon, then a purple balloon. A lot of people are upset. "I've never been in a circus before," one actor says. Another calls the yellow electric device that Hillel uses to inflate the balloon "the snowblower of 1990." Not a common item in 30's Paris."Is this Rob's idea?" someone says in a stage whisper near the choreographer."You spread that, honey, you're dead meat," Marshall says.Meanwhile Edwards is standing in the front row, Sanderson hovering at his side. If there was ever any real power struggle with the choreographer, it's over. Edwards invites input but in the end he makes decisions."I have one question," Hillel says in accented English."Only one," Edwards says, smiling."You're insane," Sanderson says."Yeah sure," Edwards says."Do I do anything when the people are saying their lines on stage?" Hillel asks."Once you're in the act you pay no attention to people," he says.THE NEXT NIGHT THE house is completely filled. Joop van den Ende, a Dutch producer, is here, too -- a big sophisticated man with a square head and rimless spectacles. Van den Ende is an important producer all over Europe, but here his  powers are limited. Everyone knows it's Blake Edwards's show. After the preview  I watch van den Ende bend over Edwards, making strong, slightly blunt gestures with his hands. It's the last I'll see of him.There's a party across the street later, and I meet John Breglio, Mr. Inside  of New York theater, a lawyer at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison who does a lot of deals. He did the legal work during the financing of "Victor/Victoria."Advertisement"I told Blake how proud he should be," he says. "It has a great book, it's funny, all it needs is some songs for Julie.""The first song?" I say.Breglio makes a cutting motion across his neck. "And it needs an ending. But  Blake says he's got it.""What are the chances this could be a giant fiasco?" I say.Breglio smiles and shakes his head no.But over the next week two things happen that suggest a fiasco in the making. The balloon man can't cut it. A couple times the balloon breaks early, which throws off the entire scene. Then apparently he underinflates it to compensate and this time he has trouble breaking out. Rob Marshall's assistants are always  finding scraps of rubber on the stage and saying how dangerous that is for dancers. What if Julie were to fall?None of the performers fall. Edwards does. One night after the show he's walking backstage when his cane catches on the edge of the scenery deck and he crashes on to the cement floor. He's in the emergency room till 2:30 A.M., being treated for cracked ribs.Amazingly, he's back at the theater a few hours after he leaves the hospital, giving the actors more lines. You see him grimacing on stage in his metal chair.AFTER A WEEK OF WORKING out the kinks, the balloon man starts getting it right. Suddenly he's awesome. The audience roars all through his act. You hear people talking about him in the lobby two hours later.Hillel knows it, too. I hear that he's making demands: separate billing, his  own dressing room.THE MAN THEY CALL "THE Android," Andrew Lloyd Webber, flies in and out of town one Wednesday to check it out (he enjoyed it, and gave Edwards suggestions), then the show officially opens on June 11, the world premiere. Garrison Keillor is in the audience. So is Samuel (Biff) Liff, Andrews's agent.  The audience is respectful. The one thing they all love is Andrews. Her curtain  call gets a standing ovation. Then the theater empties and there are just Robin Wagner, the set designer, and Blake Edwards on stage talking.I walk across Hennepin Avenue to the cast party. It goes on late. Edwards and Andrews sit at a back table with Biff Liff. Then John Scher picks up a microphone. Scher used to work at Polygram, but when Polygram got cold feet about "Victor/ Victoria," Scher left to become a general partner on the show. "I've had the thrill of a lifetime to be near an individual with the genius of Blake Edwards," he says.AdvertisementHe hands the microphone to Edwards and the director says he can't stand up. In a soft growl he tells Scher he loves him. "This gentleman stood up when the times were the toughest, when no one believed in us."Robin Wagner is heading back to New York. I ask him what he and Edwards were  doing on stage after the show."I told Blake, 'It's kind of different when the theater is empty, the magic is gone.' And he said: 'No, the magic is here. Gower Champion told me years ago, "Why don't you come to Broadway, it's the greatest experience." And now I'm thinking I should have done this 30 years ago.' I said, 'Yes, but think of what  the world would have lost,' and he just groaned. 'Think of what I lost.' "     THE COMPANY GOES BACK to New York while the scenery is moved to Chicago. The reviews in Minneapolis were mixed. The critic for St. Paul Pioneer Press said that Edwards's cinematic sensibility was at times "a detriment." One New York paper said that the finale looks like "A Chorus Line," and Marshall is busily reworking it. I call Wagner. "Cindy Adams says the scenery is great," I say."Oooh, that's bad. You never want them to notice the scenery. How was Blake?""He wears those cowboy boots," I say. "Then he trips and falls and cracks his ribs.""Oh -- but he has to wear them. They're for his Achilles' tendon. He needs to have his heel up."When I hang up I feel ashamed. Blake Edwards is trying his guts out, and I'm  like all the Broadway skeptics waiting for him to fall.I go into the rehearsal studios at 890 Broadway and bump into Tony Adams. "Come here," he says. He grabs a paper cup from the water cooler and retreats to a back alcove, then jams the cup into the gap between a folded table and the wall it's leaning against to serve as an ashtray. He drags deeply on a cigarette. To be around him is to be reminded that "glamour" is also a verb, it  means throwing a spell."We've brought in a new composer," he says. "It's not official yet. But it's  Frank Wildhorn.""Who's writing the lyrics?" I say."Leslie. You've got to hear Julie's 11 o'clock number. It's amazing. 'Living  in the Shadows.' I'm telling you it will be the new gay anthem, it's all about life in the closet and coming out, it's an amazing tune."Advertisement"What convinced you to do this?" I ask."You keep hearing the same thing, and it echoes what you're thinking. It's like the old adage, if enough people tell you you're drunk then you ought to fall over."It occurs to me that the producers might actually possess the guts to make the expensive changes their show needs. It looks as if they're finally dumping Andrews's first song. Then I go to rehearsal, and Edwards spends more than an hour fiddling with the climactic scene. He wants to put in a bit where Julie Andrews will turn on a mobster played by Ken Land and grab his crotch hard, and  he'll let out a yell. I can't figure out why they're working on this. The musical is saggy and the show is more than three hours long -- it ends a few minutes past 11 o'clock."I think the laugh is going to depend on how she grabs him and how she takes  it," Edwards says."I think she did that in 'Sound of Music,' " Land cracks.Andrews comes in wearing pink jeans and carrying a million things. "I got you money," she says, handing her assistant a Ziploc bag with a wad in it wrapped in tissue. Then she pulls off her earrings and gets to work, grabbing with brio. Tony Roberts sits on the side of the room studying The New York Post. He looks offended by the bit.There's a lull and Andrews steps toward her husband. "Why is it funny? It's hilarious isn't it? Because it's a cartoon?"You can see she doesn't like the bit, either. But she doesn't say so, in fact she tries the grab with a shorter arc. She'll do anything for her husband.Edwards says, "That's it.""Does it work?" she says. "Will it work?""It may."She looks at him. "It's not obscene? It isn't -- ""Tasteless?" someone behind her says.Edwards gets a painful expression. "The worst that happens we put it in one night and see what we get."AdvertisementAfterward I walk down the hall to Robin Wagner's office. I realize that Edwards will try anything. He doesn't care what anyone says. He's even thinking  of losing the Balloon Man to streamline the first act.Wagner is in a space his friend Michael Bennett first rented to him. His desk is behind a giant bush, and he's wearing a blue polo shirt that says "Bora Bora" on the pocket."Listen, I've been thinking about it, this is a novel not an article," he says. "It's about a guy who's been around for a long time who realizes he's been doing the wrong thing for the last 30 years."I sit on the windowsill. "He had his reasons," I say. "He liked the good life in Malibu and Gstaad. He wanted money, he got that in the movies.""People can regret things. You don't know anything about regret because your  life is still in front of you, but it's real. Maybe he did the wrong thing. This is like '42nd Street.' Remember Warner Baxter. He got one chance.""What if he succeeds?""Oh, if he succeeds! He can do anything next. I've got an idea for him. I want him to do this Russell Baker show that we were working on a long time ago." Wagner starts hunting his desk."And if he fails?"Wagner smiles sweetly and tilts his head.THE COMPANY MOVES to Chicago. I fly out on a Thursday and the rehearsal seems as grim as ever. Edwards is trying out fresh gags, and Andrews is quietly  losing patience. "My voice is squeaking and I've got one-octave range," she says. And at a preview performance that night Andrews's voice does seem small, strained.Yes, somehow it doesn't matter. All Edwards's fussing with lines has done something. The show is landing in a way it never has before. The audience laughs hard at jokes I've never liked, or maybe never got. Chicagoans, sophisticated theater people, they're laughing like people in 30's New Yorker cartoons. They're bent over in their seats with their mouths wide open. The first act of the show still has dead spots, but the end of the show, the last 40 minutes, which Edwards has been endlessly puttering with, now move like a freight train.  The laughs come in a rhythm that you can sense people anticipating. They sit forward in their seats hungry for another laugh. The crotch-grab is gone, of course.AdvertisementEdwards has also fixed the finale. Gregory Jbara, the actor who plays the closeted bodyguard of Michael Nouri's nightclub owner, sings one line by Bricusse whose sentiment puts the show over the top: "It's not a crime to love each other." Jbara has a big fine voice, he does it operatically. When they hear that line, the audience goes nuts. A lot of them stand up cheering, I see a few  crying. The show ends after 11 but the crowd in the lobby is happy."That was excellent," a woman says."No it wasn't -- it was mah-velous," the husband says. "The time just flew."Out at the corner of State and Monroe a man is singing the chorus of the finale and dancing. I never saw anyone do that in Minneapolis.I make friends with the house manager so I can sneak in at the end of the matinee the following afternoon and again that night, just to watch the freight-train finish and hear Jbara sing. Both times the crowd goes wild, and after the evening performance, I wait for Jbara on the sidewalk. We're going out for a drink. When he comes out half a dozen Andrews fans surge toward him.There's a big friendly Englishman with a Mohican, a Dutch woman who wants to  know about a videotape she sent to Andrews and a thin clean-cut 40-year-old from the West Coast. "Do you know why they replaced 'Attitude' with 'Louis Says?' " he says to me, referring to two songs.I try to explain the producers' thinking but his worried look doesn't go away.After 10 minutes or so Jbara says, "We got to roll," and we pass two girls waiting in the alley with programs and pens in their hands, watching the backstage door. They turn plaintively to Jbara."She generally comes out of that far door, but her car's gone," he says."Thanks," they say meekly.We get into a cab. "Wow, I never realized how tough it is being Julie," I say."Isn't it?" Jbara says. "These people will talk about her for hours. We could be out on that sidewalk all night."     THE NEXT NIGHT AT 5 THE SHOW OPENS. I SIT NEXT TO Richard Christiansen, the  chief critic for The Chicago Tribune. I hear him chortling over a lot of Edwards's bits. As soon as Julie Andrews does her curtain call he ducks out to make his deadline. He ends up filing a review that is headlined, "Not Soup Yet;  'Victor' Still Has Kinks."There's an opening night party on the eighth floor of Marshall Field's. The TV stations have set up lights to interview Edwards and Andrews. The couple finally get there at 9:30 or so. Edwards wears a terrified expression and Andrews goes around greeting everyone. It's just like what one of the dancers told me about rehearsal. If she stops to have a cough drop, she has to give everyone one. Andrews goes to great lengths both to maintain adorers and distance herself.Edwards moves stiffly through the crowd as if he's touring Hell without Virgil. I say something to him and he coughs a couple of syllables then steps on numbly, not using his cane. If his surrogate, Adams, makes you feel as if you're the center of the universe, he makes you feel like space debris. There's something ridiculous and dignified and vain about Edwards's gait, and I remember an occasion in Minneapolis when they were rehearsing a crowd scene and he asked  for a board, nine feet long. The stagehands found him one and he walked calmly across stage with it on his shoulder, turning at any distraction, almost knocking people's heads off. It was an old piece of slapstick that he was thinking of putting in the show. Like so much else he tried, it never made it. But his pacing was confident, graceful.A blond man keeps waving to me from the other side of the party and I walk over. I realize he was sitting on my right during the show -- Sid Smith, an arts critic at The Tribune. We talk about the show and he says, "It's an audience show."There's a touch of condescension in the comment and I bridle. "What if the critics in their wisdom are finally ready to re-embrace Blake Edwards? What if people recognize that he's one of the last links to a great comic tradition that is thoroughly American, he has complete integrity when it comes to slapstick. .  . . "I get carried away, I can feel the last of my disdain for Edwards melting.Smith nods warily. "I don't know, you might be right," he says. "But the songs are weak. 'Louis Says'? That's really about nothing.""It's camp," I say."No. Camp makes fun of bad taste. That's just bad taste."When I leave it's after midnight. The streets are empty, and I start thinking of things I should have said to Sid Smith. Then it comes to me that Blake Edwards's vast egotism is only balanced by his respect for the audience. I recall a production meeting in a small room at 890 Broadway. Tony Adams was at the director's right hand, Kirsten Sanderson at his left. Willa Kim, the costume designer, was making a plea for an additional $100,000 or so to make new costumes. Edwards couldn't focus on costumes; he was too ground up about the ending. He kept grimacing and looking away.Then he said: "When you know that something needs fixing, it makes it impossible for me to think of these other things. I just sit there and think, it's not what it should be. It's the end of our show, fellas. My entire training tells me, if you're going to tell a joke, you better have a funny punch line.""Blake, you're riding on velvet," Sanderson said.That's an old vaudeville term that means the laughs are coming so smoothly you can say anything. But Edwards knew he wasn't riding on velvet and he kept mumbling, more to himself than anyone there."If the thing is no good, if everything we're feeling about this show is wrong, then it won't mean [expletive]. But if it is what we think it is, that's  the cherry on the top. I really want to send a lot of people out smiling."His voice graveled away to nothing. He stared off helplessly. Even Tony Adams seemed afraid to break in on his mood. Then the director noticed Kim again, and  glanced her way."Look, if we're a hit, we'll build anything you want," he said.Kim tilted toward him, smiling. "Oh, I'm sure we're going to be a hit," she said.Nothing could reach Blake Edwards then. He pushed his glasses onto his forehead, he bent over and laid his brow on the cane handle. He was gazing down  into that abyss he could imagine better than anybody else. Everyone was quiet. You just heard the thin clink-clink of his ring against the cane.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 1995, on Page 6006052 of the National edition with the headline: RETURN OF THE PUNK PANTHER.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

THE NEWS ARRIVED IN A NOTE MARKED urgent by a red dot. In a few hours, it would plunge the Bosnian war into a desperate new phase. But for the moment, the note brought a smile to the open, impish face of Anthony Lake for it told him that the warplanes were finally on the way. "They've turned the keys," he said to the other officials at the interrupted White House staff meeting. At long last, the United Nations was going to punish the Bosnian Serbs for their barbarous assaults on Sarajevo.Lake walked down the hall to the Oval Office, where he offered the welcome news to President Clinton. The President congratulated him on the breakthrough, and Lake warned him not to specify in public which country had sent the planes. The Serbs, he warned, might take hostages. When the phone rang at 4:34 the next morning, May 26, Lake's fears were being realized. Gen. John Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was calling. Lake had to delay their talk as he groped for the key to convert his home phone to a secure line. Yet the crux of the general's report was scarcely secret. Serbian commanders, enraged by the bombing, had fired the single deadliest shell of the war, killing 71 civilians in the town of Tuzla. They were about to take hundreds of U.N. hostages. And over the next few months, the killing -- or as Lake says, the "evil" -- that he had hoped to contain would rage out of control.IT WASN'T SUPPOSED TO BE THIS hard, this job that Lake self-mockingly calls "national security adviser of the free world." Not in the aftermath of the cold war and the end of superpower rivalry. And not for William Anthony Kirsopp Lake, whose whole career was a preparation for the post. After three decades of striving to reconcile American power and principle, Lake came to office at a time that seemed uniquely blessed. The nation's enemies had collapsed. Its ideals had triumphed. And Lake had what appeared to be an unparalleled chance to pursue what he called "democracy's promise of a better, safer world."Instead, he wakes up each day to an ambivalent President, a contentious Congress, a public tempted by isolationism and a world of perverse new crises. It is a heavy load and it falls on a man whose marriage is faltering, whose old friends are carping and whose health shows the strain of the relentless work -- but who still insists he is "having fun, every day." Arriving on a campus amid rumors that he would be hanged in effigy for his Bosnia policy, Lake scribbled a characteristically whimsical response: "No noose is good noose."AdvertisementYet there is a noose -- around Lake and the Administration's foreign policy more generally -- and it can be summarized in two words: Bosnia policy. The Administration has had its foreign policy successes, in Haiti and elsewhere. But the failures in Bosnia have overshadowed these developments in part because they represent the collision of the two great historical lessons of the last half-century. One is the lesson of Munich: that aggression in the heart of Europe must not be appeased. The other is the lesson of Vietnam: that foreign crusades can easily trap Americans in blood baths. One lesson says get in; one says stay out. Lake's failed attempts to reconcile them paint a disturbing picture of American power in the post-cold-war world.For Lake, the events in Bosnia have also revived the conflict that has most troubled him throughout his unusual career. That is the conflict between ideals and interests -- and when it comes to Bosnia, most Americans have spent some time in its grip, appalled at the carnage and appalled as well at the risks of getting involved. The conflict between ideals and interests arises perpetually in American foreign policy, in places from Chechnya to China. And perhaps no one better personifies the competing traditions, of expansive idealism and constrained national interest, as Anthony Lake, who has given half his heart to each faith for more than 30 years.To a job traditionally held by unambiguous embodiments of American power -- men like Henry Kissinger -- Lake brings the most puzzling resume. It reads like a story of twin brothers separated at birth. He served as Kissinger's young confidant; he resigned in protest and became head of a voluntary service program. He still gets a look of teen-age excitement when he talks about well digging in Kenya. But no one confuses him for a bureaucratic naif. "I mean this in a complimentary sense," says one of his White House colleagues, who compares Lake with the most Machiavellian figure of the Bush Administration. "He's the closest thing we have to Richard Darman in terms of bureaucratic gamesmanship."Lake's awkward, self-mocking demeanor adds to the identity puzzle. Though he acts as the President's first contact with the gravitas world of generals, admirals, diplomats and spies, he makes no effort to appear Olympian. He jokes about the size of his ears and claims to revel in his anonymity. "One more potted plant imitation," he said one day as he took his place at a Presidential ceremony. Odd things can move him, as when he rushed to rescue a dangling modifier in the middle of a lunchtime conversation: "Whew -- almost a grammatical error on the record."He is by design the most obscure member of the Clinton foreign policy team, surely the only national security adviser ever to stand beside the President in a New York Times photograph and be described as an "unidentified" man. Yet apart from the President and Vice President, Lake may also be the most powerful influence on foreign affairs.Part of Lake's advantage is the edge that security advisers always hold, proximity to the President. Lake alone sees Clinton on a daily basis, and it is his job to broker the constant clashes between (and within) the defense, diplomacy and intelligence agencies. But Lake gains an additional edge from the colorless qualities of his would-be rivals, Warren Christopher, the Secretary of State, and William J. Perry, the Secretary of Defense. "There are very few times that Tony ultimately is reversed or changed or modified," says Leon Panetta, the White House chief of staff.Given the rough ride of the past few years, that is not always a compliment. But Lake brought his struggles over ideals and interests to a happier resolution during the debates last year over Haiti. He had mostly delegated the issue during his first year in office, when the humiliations included an American military ship being chased away by a mob on a Port-au-Prince dock. By April 1994, the attempts to dislodge the island's military dictators had reached a dead end.Lake convened a meeting in his office to discuss the numerous calls for tightened economic sanctions. Looking ahead, he told the group he thought the move would inflict great pain on average Haitians without driving the rulers from the island. If Clinton started down that road, he argued, the number of refugees would grow, and with it the pressure to finish the job militarily. No one else at his level was yet talking invasion, and Lake sent off those in attendance -- senior but not top representatives of the Defense and State Departments -- to start making that case to their principals. Lake began doing the same with Clinton.Advertisement"This was a decisive turning point," says one of those officials. "Tony forced the policy process to confront the full implications of the decision. This is the way policy ought to be done." By last fall, Lake found himself on a flatbed truck in the Port-au-Prince slum district of Cite Soleil, greeting a crowd that stretched to the horizon. "Bonjour," he began, and tens of thousands of exhilarating "bonjours" roared back.But which, in the end, defines him: the success in Haiti or the lack of it in Bosnia? Lake's struggles over his own identity can be seen in the contorted label he assigned to his beliefs, then quickly abandoned, early in the Administration: "pragmatic neo-Wilsonian." Lake returned to the subject of his conflicting identities one night earlier this year, as he returned on a military jet from a follow-up trip to Haiti. "Can I trust you not to make me sound like a jerk," he began, "if I talk to you about something philosophical?"For the next half hour, Lake reviewed the journey that took him from Kissinger's staff to the nonprofit world, from what he called the "hard stuff" of making decisions about the Vietnam War to the "soft stuff" of third-world development. "I left the 'hard stuff' for the 'soft stuff,' " he said. "I was in two different worlds. I could do them both." Though he was wrapped in a blanket, fighting the flu, Lake's face came alive as he struggled to make his point, one that seemed as personally important as it was difficult to express. "Now, I think, our society has come back to where we were in World War II, that there are evil forces out there, and there's not so much a distinction between the 'hard stuff' and the 'soft stuff,' between fighting terrorists and promoting small-scale development."He capped his talk with an idiosyncratic metaphor that suggests the synthesis is not as smooth as he thinks. "I think Mother Teresa and Ronald Reagan were both trying to do the same thing -- one helping the helpless, one fighting the Evil Empire," he said. "One of the nice things about this job is you can do both at the same time and not see them as contradictory."That, at least, is his hope.ONE AFTERNOON AT THE END of May, Lake got on an airplane to Massachusetts -- and for a confused moment he thought he was back in Vietnam. He was describing the life he had led there as a Foreign Service officer three decades ago. Then, suddenly, he lost his train of thought. "I'm totally disoriented," he said, shaking his head and staring down at a sunny outline of the Jersey shore. "I thought for a moment that was the Vietnam coast."It's never far away, that place where Lake first tried to do his share of good, only to see the effort go disastrously awry. Vietnam consumed him for the better part of a decade -- as an ambassador's aide in Saigon, a vice consul in Hue and a keeper of the war's top secrets inside the Nixon White House. He resists the idea that he took away anything so neat as lessons, but when talking about Bosnia, Lake sometimes offers them nonetheless. Don't forget, he said, that good intentions "can lead to a war of murderous naivete."It didn't seem so complicated at the start, when Lake set off in 1963 with what he would later call "incredibly naive optimism." He was a New Frontier Democrat, fresh from Harvard and Cambridge universities, sure of his nation's purpose and power. "I wanted to go to Vietnam because it sounded interesting and exciting and because it was on the front lines of democracy," he said. "I believed we, the United States, could do anything if we worked hard enough and thought hard enough."Lake could not have known the foreshadowing involved when he spent the flight to Saigon reading Graham Greene's novel "The Quiet American." It is the classic derision of a figure much like the 23-year-old Tony Lake -- an earnest, educated young man from New England who hopes to bring democracy to Vietnam. But in Greene's version the quest brings senseless death. "I remember thinking to myself, 'What does Graham Greene know?' " Lake says. "Because that's exactly what I believed."AdvertisementLake's ancestors had often gone forth in the world carrying torches. His mother's father, William Hard, was a muckraking journalist raised in India by missionary parents; his father's father, Kirsopp Lake, was a prominent British theologian who emigrated to teach at Harvard. Lake's younger sister, Lydia, says the history of service and distinction was captured in the portraits of relatives that lined the family's walls. "There's a tiny streak," she says, "where Tony feels the import of carrying on the family name: he's the last of the Kirsopp Lakes." Lake seemed wary when asked about the family past. "I know where you're going," he said accusingly, and then he finished the thought himself. "It's probably true to some degree -- some degree of missionary impulse. Dangerous stuff."Lake's older sister, Anne Lake Prescott, insists that the moral clarity of the Second World War gave her brother two early and fundamental beliefs -- that evil exists and that organized resistance can defeat it. His father rushed to join the Navy; his mother organized victory gardens. When I protested that Lake was only 6 when the war ended, Prescott, who teaches literature at Barnard, clung to her point even tighter. "Yes, but that's when those synapses are formed," she says. She calls his voyage to Vietnam Lake's turn at "going out to fight the bad guys."Lake recounted his Vietnam odyssey in an extraordinary article he wrote with his wife, Antonia, for The New York Times Magazine in 1975. It took the form of a long, intimate letter in alternating he-she passages. (She: "Remember the letters you wrote the year before we were married, about service, adventure and the chance to change the world?" He: "It was heady stuff. But, increasingly, the reality of the war intruded upon the romance.") It is a confessional piece of writing, all the more surprising given how little Lake is willing to reveal of his inner life today.Part of it covers political insights, like those absorbed one day in 1964 on a battlefield littered with enemy dead. Among them was a young man with "a thin, scholarly face," a face that reminded Lake of his own. "If somebody like that was prepared to lay down his life," he decided, the enemy was powerfully motivated indeed. But Lake also found that the war had him personally "responding in ways I did not understand." He describes holding a gun as he rode with a military escort through an area that had recently been ambushed. "With the gun came the hope that someone would fire at us from the clumps of trees lining the road, so I could fire back," he wrote. "Usually doubtful that I could shoot another person, at that moment I was emotionally prepared to do so."Lake had been telling Vietnam stories in a lighthearted fashion one day, but when I asked about that one, he suddenly grew uncomfortable. "It's a stupid story. You can quote me." Yet as he returned to the memory, 30 years later, it did not seem stupid at all; it appeared to embody the deep ambivalence of a man usually hoping, and often doubting, that power can be harnessed to moral ends. "It wasn't that I wanted to kill somebody," he said. "I think it was excitement. You know, there is nothing more powerful than a weapon that could take somebody else's life." Lake dropped his voice and started to mumble. "It was sort of a 'welcome to the human race moment,' " he said. "We are carnivores."By the time Lake left Vietnam, the adventure in democracy building was well on its way to disaster. In January 1965, thousands of Buddhist demonstrators set fire to the American Government library in Hue, where Lake was vice consul. Lake braved the mob and tried to put out the fire, inspiring a Boston Herald article headlined, " 'Tough Tony' Lake Faces Down 3,000 Howling Buddhists." Asked why he did it, Lake even now sounds a bit like "The Quiet American." "They were burning books!" he said. His wife and young son were evacuated a month later, and Lake soon followed them home. He was troubled about the war but did not yet oppose it. "I still thought, somehow, we could find the clean colonel."Instead, in time, he found Henry Kissinger. After two years of deepening disillusionment inside the State Department and two years of graduate school, Lake joined Kissinger's staff in June 1969. He immediately won an extraordinary measure of confidence, sitting in on the Paris peace talks when their existence was so secretive they were concealed from the Secretary of State. He had just turned 30.Lake had signed on dazzled by Kissinger's intellect and convinced he would negotiate an end to the war. Kissinger orchestrated its escalation instead, pushing the invasion of Cambodia 10 months later, at which point Lake resigned in protest. But the two men -- pupil and teacher, idealist and realist -- stay linked by a complicated bond of mutual usefulness and fascination, even as Lake now holds Kissinger's old job. Lake was milling about during a state visit to Kiev this spring when an old Ukrainian veteran asked for his autograph. Watching Lake blush, someone in the entourage asked what he had signed. "Henry Kissinger," he said.AdvertisementThe grip of Lake's mixed feelings -- not just toward the man but also to the interest-driven world view that Kissinger embodies -- comes through in a story Lake tells about his graduate-school exams. He was asked to attack or defend a Kissinger statement of classic Realpolitik: that statesmen should concern themselves with the foreign policies of other countries, not how those countries treat their own citizens. Lake wrote an enthusiastic defense, "supporting Kissinger's proposition on logical grounds." That night, Lake went to see a film about Nazism in Europe and when he returned the next day for oral exams, he startled his professors by arguing the other side. "I totally threw them off," he says.A quarter-century later, Lake is still benefiting from his resignation, which lent him a reputation for unusual conscience. "He chucked it all, for ethical reasons," says R. Nicholas Burns, now the State Department spokesman, who regards Lake as a kind of moral model. But Lake acknowledges that his tutelage in wartime Realpolitik had its moral gray zones. Soon after joining the staff, Lake learned that Kissinger was involved in wiretaps of other young aides. Though Lake says he found the practice "repellent," he decided not to confront Kissinger about the wiretap summaries flowing into the office safe. (And after he resigned, Lake was tapped, too; he sued Kissinger and eventually won a letter of apology.) "I was already arguing with him on Vietnam," Lake said. "I worried it would sound paranoid to go to him and say, 'What's in the safe?' "Lake resigned, but did so in a muted way that diminished its public effect. Along with two colleagues, Roger Morris and William Watts, Lake argued that the invasion of Cambodia would destroy that country and escalate the violence at home -- prescient predictions given the savageries of Pol Pot and the explosion at Kent State. (Kissinger mocked them as "my bleeding heart friends.") But Lake said nothing in public, instead joining Morris in a letter to Kissinger expressing "our regard and respect for you." Morris has called the quiet resignation "the biggest failure of my life." But Lake says, "I would probably do the same thing again, because I thought you could have more influence that way."The great adventure "on the front lines of democracy" had come to a bitter end. Lake's wife would write that the experience had soured her on power in general, but the future national security adviser had not given up. "I retain the belief that I found so attractive in the Kennedy years," he wrote in 1975, "that problems created by man can at least be ameliorated by man, and that we must try."Lake was still trying two decades later on a snowy day in 1991 when he first met Bill Clinton. After leaving Kissinger, Lake had worked in Senator Edmund Muskie's 1972 Presidential campaign, finished his doctorate and served as director of International Voluntary Services, a private agency that sent volunteers across the third world. He went back into political battle on Jimmy Carter's campaign and reaped a choice reward: the State Department's Office of Policy Planning, which he directed from 1977 to 1981. Throughout the Reagan and Bush years, he taught international relations at Mount Holyoke College in western Massachusetts and raised cattle on his 130-acre farm in nearby Worthington.Then one November afternoon, he took a drive to Boston, where his old State Department deputy, Samuel Berger, was waiting to introduce him to Clinton. They set off to find the candidate before a suburban fund-raising dinner but soon became hopelessly lost amid the snow and the cul-de-sacs. Arriving late, Lake had to wait through the dinner, then settle for a 10-minute car ride with the weary candidate; Clinton asked one question about arms control but mostly quizzed Lake on how the ailing economy was affecting his neighbors.A journey of wrong turns and backed tracks, culminating in a truncated conversation with a leader not terribly interested in foreign affairs -- it might have seemed like an ominous metaphor. But Clinton used foreign policy adeptly as a candidate and much of the credit accrued to Lake, who soon became his leading unpaid adviser. As a domestic candidate, Clinton needed someone he could turn to and say, "Handle it," and Lake did, helping position Clinton as both more moral and more muscular than his tired Republican opponent, in places as diverse as Haiti, Bosnia and China.Among those impressed was George Stephanopoulos, the campaign aide turned White House counselor. "The easiest way to say it is he's moral without being a moralist," he says. "There's this quote by Camus, something like perhaps we can't stop killing children but we can limit the number of children killed. It's always struck me that Tony's internalized that message. He's deeply moral and deeply realistic at the same time." Yet it is one of the curiosities about Lake that just as many who have worked with him closely find the moral talk skin-deep. "Tony always has his famous integrity to march out," says Michael Janeway, a colleague in the Carter State Department. "Tony is really an apparatchik. Perhaps the weightiest thing he's done is position himself well."AdvertisementAnd immediately after the election Clinton found himself in a number of embarrassing retreats. After vowing that "I would never send those poor people back" to Haiti, Clinton announced before the inauguration that he would do just that. After demanding an urgent response in the Balkans, Clinton responded with tortured ambivalence and inaction. There was a poignancy in such developments for Lake, since he had co-written a 1984 book, "Our Own Worst Enemy," that warned candidates to watch their words. "What they say now," he wrote, "will be held against them."The book's larger point was that American foreign policy was being poisoned by ideological fights at home, and he argued that public, partisan security advisers were among the problems. Indeed, Lake may have given more advance thought to what a national security adviser should and should not do than anyone who has held the post. Lake had seen two predecessors, Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski, turn themselves into superstatesmen who eclipsed the Cabinet. In his view, this sacrificed the more important role of presenting Presidents with the full range of their advisers' views. He sought the quieter broker style exemplified by Bush's adviser, Brent Scowcroft.Yet Lake acknowledges that there's no such thing as a pure broker and that his model "revolves around what can be a dilemma." He says his primary responsibility is to "make sure that the President is getting all points of view," but he also offers his own recommendations "because if you don't have views, you shouldn't be doing the job." And the dual roles, broker and adviser, "can come into tension, obviously." Lake said he erred on the side of plain broker during his first year, but he has since become quicker to assert his own views "because it helps move issues to a resolution." Recently, Lake has even moved into the role of public diplomat, after first insisting a security adviser should never usurp the position of the Secretary of State. On Aug. 9, Lake led a mission to Europe to seek a breakthrough on Bosnia amid mutterings that he was pulling an end run around the State Department.More often than not, what moves Lake from broker to activist are issues that touch his internal compass, his sense of "evil." When Rwandan refugees poured into Zaire in July 1994, Lake personally marshaled the impressive American relief mission. He became the White House equivalent of a Central African desk officer, miring himself in the details of water bladders, cargo planes and local airport layout.  (But he had been extremely cautious about any military involvement as the slaughters were taking place. In one country, the two Tony Lakes emerged, idealist and realist.)A second, very different example of Lake's advocacy can be seen in his strong support for NATO's eastward expansion, against those counseling deference to Russian sensibilities. Lake can give long geopolitical arguments for the move, but he says it "absolutely" also connects to his early thoughts on evil as a child whose parents were caught up in World War II. "We don't have evil out there right now, but human nature has not changed." Lake cares enough about the word "evil" that he insisted last spring that the President use it on his visit to Babi Yar, the ravine outside Kiev where the Nazis machine-gunned more than 100,000 people, mostly Jews. Speech writers had substituted a euphemism about the "depravity" of man, but Lake does not think man is depraved; he thinks that most people are basically good, yet evil lurks among them. "If you can't use 'evil' at Babi Yar, when can you use it?" Lake said, savoring his small victory as the motorcade pulled away.BUT THERE ARE ALWAYS MORE than enough evils to resist. The perpetual questions are: which ones and how? Neither Christopher nor Perry has succeeded in the role of a public spokesman, and Lake's occasional attempts to fill the vacuum play to his weaknesses as well; he is neither comfortable nor effective in the limelight. With the Clinton foreign policy under assault for lacking a central theme, Lake tried to offer one last September in remarks to the Council on Foreign Relations. Lake claimed to see a single international struggle taking shape, pitting the "face of a tolerant society" against a list of enemies that included "extreme nationalists and tribalists, terrorists, organized criminals, coup plotters, rogue states." America's job, he suggested, remained the same as it has always been -- to throw "ourselves with determination into the fight."If only it were so simple. As the writer James Fallows noted in a subsequent radio commentary, Lake was impaled on an old dilemma. "Because the United States was founded on universal theories of liberty," it has always felt some stake in fighting foreign tyranny. But because American power has limits, "some tyranny, somewhere, must be ignored. The eternal question has been how and where to draw that line." The implication of Lake's speech, Fallows said, was "that we don't need lines at all -- everything that's bad, we'll be against."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The day-to-day limits start with the national mood -- what is often described as isolationism but might more accurately be called incoherence. On the one hand, the public continues to expect American dominance in the world; on the other hand, there is no public willingness to pay the price, either with blood or money. The point came home earlier this year when Lake joined Shalikashvili for a day at the battleground at Gettysburg. They toured Rodes's Hill and Little Round Top and the scene of Pickett's futile charge, walking across the fields where three days of fighting produced more than 40,000 casualties. Then, in the battlefield bookstore, they reflected on a Somali mission that had been labeled a disaster because it claimed the lives of 18 soldiers. "Something has broken down in the debate about the use of force," Shalikashvili said, in words especially noteworthy coming from the leader of the notoriously cautious Pentagon. "Eighteen people died so thousands and thousands could live. To me, that's glory." Lake nodded.  Still, the deaths in Somalia affected him so deeply that he had offered to resign. And the deaths clearly played into his reluctance, seven months later, to send even foreign peace-keepers into Rwanda.The public mood is one influence on foreign policy, but it can be altered by a second, more important force: Presidential leadership. While Lake often brings two minds to an issue -- that of the idealist and of the realist -- he serves a President notorious for often having many more minds than that. The Administration's foreign policy is derided almost everywhere for being ad hoc, episodic, unsteady, easily reversed. Kissinger says, "Almost everywhere the Administration gets engaged, it recoils before the consequences." Leslie Gelb, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, says Clinton "does not have strong convictions about foreign policy and doesn't spend much time on these issues." Robert Zoellick, an Under Secretary of State in the Bush Administration, says, "The attitude around the world about the constancy, credibility and commitment of our policies has slipped farther than at any time I can remember."AdvertisementThat is the bumper-sticker indictment, but as with most labels about Clinton, it captures only a partial truth. The most obvious exception, of course, is Haiti, where Clinton ousted the dictators in a risky move with what was at best thin public support. (Some Democratic allies in Congress went as far as warning him he could face impeachment if U.S. troops took high casualties.) "After you've been through Haiti with Clinton, it's very difficult to understand how people can say every day that he has no principles or convictions and proceeds by putting his finger in the air," says the author Taylor Branch, a Clinton friend who also served as an informal adviser to Haiti's exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.And beyond Haiti there are at least two other areas of foreign policy success, where Clinton has set a course and clung to it. One involves international economics, where the President has repeatedly shown steady leadership despite political risks. Nafta, GATT, the planned free trade zones in Latin America and Asia -- these are subjects little understood by the public but ones to which Clinton brings his own orienting beliefs, his commitment to free trade.The President has enjoyed a second, eclectic set of successes in areas as disparate as the Middle East peace process and the de-nuclearization of the former Soviet Union. What these seemingly disconnected matters have in common is that they flow from some previously established set of rules -- either specific negotiating tracks (as in the Middle East) or an obvious American interest (as in getting nuclear arms out of Ukraine). When the rules are more tightly defined, as they are here, Clinton's gifts of intelligence, energy and eloquence work on his behalf. But in areas with sharply colliding interests, Clinton's vast capacity to absorb information may actually work against him. Absorbing all points of view, he can be loath to settle on one.Such was the case with Clinton's decision to extend China's most-favored-nation trade status, after lambasting Bush for doing the same. ("There is no more striking example of Mr. Bush's indifference toward democracy," Clinton said during the campaign.) Once in office, Clinton found himself caught between his conflicting pursuits of human rights and expanded trade. He needed to make a decision, but in effect he made two. In May 1993, he reiterated his threat to punish the Chinese, and subordinates pushed the rights agenda hard in subsequent months; then Clinton dropped his threats when the deadline arrived. Lacking even a fig leaf to cover his retreat, Clinton conceded that "serious human rights abuses continue." Even those who supported his final position, like Kenneth Lieberthal of the University of Michigan, found that he got there having inflicted the maximum collateral damage on himself. "If I was in Beijing, I'd love to be the person to make the case that you don't have to worry about what this President says because he'll cave in the end," he says.Among those who quickly came to a similar conclusion were the Bosnian Serbs.THE SLEEPING POWDER WORE off in the middle of the night, somewhere over the North Atlantic. Lake massaged his rubbery face and paced Air Force One in stocking feet, wishing that he had taken a larger dose. "I keep waking up," he said. It was May 8, and across the dimmed, quiet 747, Presidential aides were dozing in thick padded chairs. They were en route to the Moscow summit. But as he stretched and sipped a carton of milk, Lake had Sarajevo on his mind.For months, Lake had joined those predicting that the spring thaw would renew the Bosnian war, and in recent days the expected had come true. The Bosnian Serbs had resumed their worst shelling in more than a year, in daily contempt for the ultimatums meant to protect the city. Lake was urging the United Nations to respond with air strikes but was meeting strong resistance from allies worried about the taking of hostages. "In our view, there's greater safety if the Serbs think we're serious," he said. "But in the French and the British view, that's easy for us to say, since we don't have troops on the ground." Lake would subsequently win the air strikes, only to join in abandoning them quickly when the Serbs took the U.N. hostages. And once again American policy in Bosnia seemed weak and conflicted.Nothing casts a greater pall over the entire Clinton foreign policy.  Bosnia is hard for everyone, not just for Lake. (Bush, touted for his foreign policy acumen, fared no better than Clinton.) But Bosnia policy is also hard along the very fault line that Lake has straddled throughout his life, forcing him, as he says, to weigh "ideals against the cost of intervention." He had hoped for a world in which "the hard" and "the soft," the interest-driven and the idealistic aspects of his mentality, might fuse into a united fight against evil. Instead, he finds himself each day straddling a painful divide. "It's an excruciating problem," he says.Odd as it may now seem, Bosnia once gave the Clinton campaign a boost. As reports of concentration camps began to filter out in July 1992, Clinton condemned Bush's inaction and called for air strikes to aid the humanitarian effort. Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, leaped on Clinton for "reckless" statements, only to discover the Administration's Defense Secretary, Dick Cheney, was saying the same thing. "It was an important moment," Lake says, since it left Clinton looking more forceful, more competent and more humane.AdvertisementBut the event also signaled Lake's own ambivalence. He insisted on inserting a qualification into the Clinton statement, writing that American efforts "may not succeed at this stage, but at least we must do what we reasonably can." It is a striking hedge. And it sufficiently encompasses a quality about Lake (prudence or weakness, depending on one's point of view) that it has become an inner-office joke. Nancy Soderberg, one of his deputies, sometimes responds to assignments by joking, "I'll do what I reasonably can."But what, on Bosnia, is that? If Lake was caught between conflicting impulses, Clinton raised indecision to an art form. By the time Clinton reached office, he was certainly no longer talking about helping the United Nations shoot its way into Sarajevo, as he had the previous June. But he continued to call himself "saddened," "sickened," "appalled" and "outraged" at the Serbian attacks, creating expectations that made his ultimate inaction seem all the more weak-kneed. "The U.S. should always seek an opportunity to stand up against -- at least speak out against -- inhumanity," he said at a photo session on April 20, 1993. As Elizabeth Drew noted in her book "On the Edge," this was exactly the elemental question: which would it be?It is hard to imagine a clearer affront to the values Lake champions in his speeches -- to the "face of the tolerant society" -- than the rape, torture, execution, indiscriminate shelling and ethnic cleansing sanctioned by Bosnian Serb leaders who have been branded war criminals. The Western retreat does not equate with Munich; the Serbs, unlike the Nazis, are no threat to London or Paris. But the unpunished Serb advances do invite future problems, encouraging others to practice similar aggression. So the United States has not only ideals but interests at stake.Nonetheless, Lake has insisted on "a clear red line against any American ground troops there," noting that "Bosnia's a much tougher neighborhood" than Haiti. Vietnam remains on his mind. "There are a lot of very practical lessons that come out of Vietnam," he said. "Think ahead. Don't make commitments that you can't meet. And just don't wander into something." Even if he wanted to dispatch American ground forces -- which he does not -- Lake said the move "would never be supported by the American people and the Congress in any case." The public wariness is real, but neither Lake nor Clinton has made a serious attempt to build public support, for ground troops or for any forceful use of American power in the Balkans. If the worst European crisis in 50 years does not move them to make the case, there are increasingly few places that do.The refusal to consider ground forces gives the United States only so much leverage, and it has used that only weakly and sporadically. The failed attempt in May 1993 to sell the allies on the policy of "lift and strike" is but one case in point. After months of early debate, Clinton finally decided to promote a policy of lifting the United Nations arms embargo and threatening the Bosnian Serbs with air strikes if they tried to overrun the country while the Government was arming itself. But the allies were opposed. With their troops a part of the U.N. peace-keeping force, they feared the move would increase the violence and even spread the war.Christopher's attempt to convince them otherwise proved famously ineffective. Christopher took a deferential approach, asking rather than insisting. And as Elizabeth Drew recounts, no sooner had he left for Europe than Clinton himself again seemed to be rethinking the whole idea. The President told Les Aspin, then the Secretary of Defense, that after reading Robert Kaplan's book "Balkan Ghosts," he was struck by the conflict's deep historical roots. Convinced that Clinton was already abandoning his own policy, Aspin called Lake and others to warn them that "he's not on board." The policy would have been hard to sell under the best conditions, but with such flagging conviction it was impossible.In the two years since, Clinton has seemed to concentrate mainly on personal damage control, trying to keep his distance from a Bosnian quagmire that if sufficiently misplayed could imperil his Presidency. But a series of unhappy compromises now threatens to leave him with the the worst of both worlds -- a record of capitulation and the commitment of American troops.  The weak United Nations mission is now on the verge of collapse. If it does withdraw, the United States, as the lead partner in NATO, is pledged to protect the U.N. forces on the way out.  The extraction could last four months, cost $1 billion and involve as many as 25,000 American troops; they would be caught in the conflict just as Clinton cranks up his re-election campaign. To avoid this scenario, Lake and Clinton embarked on a last-ditch effort to save the U.N. mission, wringing an allied pledge to punish future Serbian attacks with widespread, unyielding air strikes -- even in the face of hostage-taking. "I'm telling you, this is different. This is very serious," Lake said, in the kind of I-mean-it tone national security advisers hope never to find themselves using.Meanwhile Congress has repudiated Clinton and voted to lift the arms embargo without the allies' consent. If Clinton fails to sustain his veto, the move will be sure to spell the end of the peace-keeping force and the consequent entry of United States troops.AdvertisementHowever this latest impasse turns out, Lake's words a year ago, at the Council on Foreign Relations, seem ever more ironic. "Rather than throw our hands up in despair at the complexities of the post-cold-war era . . ." he said, "we are helping to create a world where tolerance, freedom and democracy prevail."THE CHILDHOOD HOME WHERE Lake's views took shape was a prosperous, self-consciously intellectual place, proud of its mild peculiarity. As a young man, Lake's father had dropped out of Harvard to work in a textile mill; he later rose to become head of research and development for Burlington Industries. Lake's mother edited books for Reader's Digest. The home was such that the Lake children did not think it unusual to find an aunt in the parlor explaining how Virgil used meter to reinforce meaning.A crumbling family photo from the early 1950's captures the surface whimsy: his mother smilingly lofts a spyglass, his sister a flute and his father crosses a plunger and a tennis Continued on page 46 racket into a makeshift coat of arms. It is no surprise that the stiff, grinning teen-ager holding a model sailboat would become the kind of national security adviser who a) slipped away from a Presidential entourage to ride a motorbike around Corregidor, b) checked his rotisserie baseball standings from the palace in Kiev and c) roused his aides at 6:30 in the morning to skate on a frozen Ottawa canal. "I was always within the bounds of the conventional trying to be eccentric," he said.Trying -- but the family still very much believed in conventional success. Lake left for prep school at Middlesex in Concord, Mass., in the ninth grade, and his idea of teen-age rebellion was to announce an interest in attending Stanford. "My father said it was a good idea, but he didn't know who was going to pay for it," he says. "I was always going to go to Harvard." Phrased another way, if Lake's early life instructed him to do good in the world, it also told him to do well. The two messages might be considered the internal analogues of Lake's politics, of his swings between idealism and Realpolitik. Though Lake pretends to have little personal ambition -- he joked in 1992 he was joining the Clinton Administration because "the price of beef is down" -- everyone describes him as an intensely competitive man. Strobe Talbott, the Deputy Secretary of State, sees Lake's love of squash as a metaphor for his mix of courtliness and a fierce desire to win. "Squash is the ultimate Tony Lake sport," he says. "There's a lot of disciplined violence."Lake's professional drive brought early strains to his marriage. "Your work seemed consistently to have precedence over personal and family matters," his wife wrote in their 1975 Times Magazine article. Lake pleaded guilty: "I find it difficult to recall how readily I, too, assumed that my professsional career was more important." But the two stayed together for another 20 years before agreeing last January to separate. Lake will not discuss his marriage other than to say there are no plans for a divorce. But friends say the work may have played a role: he originally told his wife he would serve as security adviser for only two years. Then he decided to stay on.For a top White House official, Lake does little socializing and ties to some of his old friends have grown strained as well. Neither Peter Tarnoff nor Richard Holbrooke, both senior State Department officials, would discuss Lake, though the three had been close friends since their time together in Vietnam. Holbrooke is a godfather of one of Lake's daughters. But he told intermediaries he would not be interviewed about Lake; he feared his remarks would take a negative turn.In a professional sense, one relationship matters most -- the one with Bill Clinton -- and it's a source of constant speculation. Colleagues are often struck by the body language between the large, volcanic Clinton and Lake, whose diffident manner makes him seem smaller than he is. "Tony always gives you the impression that he's not that sure of his relationship with Bill Clinton," said a top official. "I can see it in meetings; he's nervous of it." But the official also added: "Because the President is not involved in foreign policy as much as other Presidents have been, Tony is in a unique position. He's the only one who sees the President every day. That puts him in a very strong position to be the interpreter."I asked Clinton about his relationship with Lake in a hallway of Air Force One, as the President returned from the Moscow summit in May. "Let me tell you two things that I think are important," said Clinton, who quickly praised Lake's role as a broker who kept him informed of views from across the Government. "He gives me consistently good advice and he gives me advice that's different from his on the big questions. But secondly, he also manages to organize a system at the N.S.C. that has kept up the workload on the hundreds ofother things we have to deal with and doesn't let a lot fall through the cracks." Clinton's point was that in the post-cold-war world, he can never be sure where the next Chechnya or Rwanda will arise. "What's not important today may become very important tomorrow, so you have to manage the entire workload." By doing so, the President said, Lake had "served our country very well."AdvertisementThen another thought hit Clinton, perhaps because Lake always seems to be beating back some medium-size ailment. He was carted from a Congressional breakfast in 1993 after collapsing from dehydration. He missed the G-7 summit this year while recovering from hernia surgery. He's had continued battles with bronchitis and even his tooth gave out on the day of the showdown with the Haitian dictators, forcing him to undergo emergency repairs at the White House. "I've worried about him several times because I think he works too hard, frankly," Clinton said. "And I've tried to run him off a few times. Not run him off from his job, but just literally get him to go home and get some sleep for the weekend."CLINTON WAS NOT calling Lake soft, but Lake understands that his reputation for idealism is not an unalloyed blessing. Fairly or not, questions of toughness have often trailed him. As a schoolboy, Lake was younger and smaller than most of his classmates; then he sprouted and captained the squash team at Harvard and rode a motorcyle to the Nixon White House. Still, Kissinger once taunted him to make a memo more "manly" and colleagues found Lake in the White House basement, smashing his fist into a Coke machine in frustration. During our intermittent travels over six months, Lake repeatedly tried to temper his idealistic image with references to his more manipulative side, insisting with obvious sarcasm, for instance, that he would never tell a lie. Riding in the Presidential motorcade through Kiev, Lake suddenly and sourly recalled a 1976 article in The Washington Monthly, portraying him and Holbrooke as two young stars. "Dick Holbrooke was going to be the national security adviser and I was this squishy softy who was going to run the Peace Corps," he said. "It was awful."But people who know him well have no doubts about Lake's gift for crafty maneuvering. Brainerd Taylor, one of Lake's Harvard roommates, still resents Lake's strategy for obtaining the suite's private bedroom, which they had shared during alternating terms. During his turn, Lake had the room painted "an absolutely bilious yellow," said Taylor, who as a future major in architecture was appalled. "He knew I would be absolutely unwilling to sleep in it. That was Tony to a T."Lake claims no memory of that but he offers a story just like it -- about, of all things, how he outmaneuvered his draft board. Lake received his draft notice in mid-1962, as he was training to become a Foreign Service officer. "At the time, they were not sending draftees to Vietnam, so my choice was to go to Vietnam with the State Department or go to Fort Dix or somewhere with the Army," he said. Wanting to go to Vietnam, he asked the State Department to send a letter, telling the draft board that he had already been assigned to language training. But the board insisted on seeing him in person, and at the subsequent hearing in Torrington, Conn., one of the members asked him to speak Vietnamese. Rather than remind the panel that the course had not yet begun, Lake began counting to 10 in the Asian language he knew, Chinese. "And they said, 'O.K., you can go to Vietnam.' " It wasn't a direct lie, he observes now. "But I did mislead them in speaking Chinese. That's the only time in my life, ever" that he's done that, he said, "and if you believe that, I've got this property in Florida."The moment was lighthearted and the story was funny. It was only later that an uneasiness set in: Bill Clinton's national security adviser was joking about manipulating his draft board. As if this President didn't have enough problems for having misled his. Unlike Clinton, of course, Lake did go to Vietnam and he did display physical courage under fire -- "Tough Tony" Lake. In his case, the urge to reveal the deception is as interesting as the episode itself. He was so eager to convey his craftiness, Lake forgot how the story might sound to some of the less-privileged soldiers he and Clinton may soon be dispatching to Bosnia.Shalikashvili, for one, suspects that the lack of military experience must complicate Lake's decisions about the use of force. "My feeling is that he must always be conscious when it comes to making decisions on the use of military power -- that the President has not served and that he had not served," he said. The general went out of his way to say that "he deals with it very well" and that military experience would not necessarily push Lake's decisions in a particular direction. But he did say, "the decisions would probably be easier because he would then have been a member of the 'club,' if you will."At times, Lake still seems as though he wants to join. On a trip to Massachusetts this spring, Lake gunned his rental car and playfully began dodging imaginary orange cones. He had just completed a Secret Service course in evasive driving. Roaring down I-91 toward Amherst, he recalled another recent adventure: tagging along on a simulated dogfight in an F-15. His plane was in the lead when the pilot pulled a supersonic about-face, stalling the fighter upside down. "It was the most ecstatic moment you could imagine," he said. "Then he gunned it, brought it around and blew the other guy away." Lake concluded the story by laughing at his own enthusiasms. "It was something every 14-year-old should do," he said.The danger Lake did face as a 14-year-old was more terrestrial: his father's explosive temper. "He could really get going sometimes," Lake says. Gerard Lake was an ardent New Dealer, more passionate about politics than business, and he would become particularly vexed when arguing with his Republican wife. The prevailing family interpretation is that the clashes between his parents bred in Lake the skills of the future diplomat. He would shuttle between the two, defusing the moment with his diffidence and wit. But Lake sees an additional legacy in his own conflicts about anger. "It taught me to hold my temper," he says. "Especially when I was younger, I would become very polite, very icy and very nasty when I was angry."AdvertisementA number of his colleagues have glimpsed the cold rage behind a trembling lip, but a more visible eruption occurred in Jakarta, after a prep session for a Clinton news conference. Lake was in the President's suite, briefing him on a list of matters that included esoteric developments on the island of Quemoy. Clinton, still in an unflattering batik shirt, was running late. Finally John Podesta, then Clinton's staff secretary, called the session to a close: there would be no time for Quemoy if the President was going to change into his suit. The meeting broke up in confusion and a furious Lake followed Podesta into the hall, warning him never again to show him such disrespect in front of Clinton. The argument continued down the hallway, where the quick-tempered Podesta called Lake a perfectionist who was wasting the President's time. Then Lake really exploded, grabbed Podesta and tried to shove him into the wall. ("Are you going to put in there that we then went off and had a nice lunch?" Lake asked.)Another eruption involved the delicate subject of relations with the State Department. As senior policy makers in the Carter years, both Lake and Christopher had witnessed the brutal interagency battles between Brzezinski and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. Lake and Christopher came into their current roles vowing to operate more cooperatively, and by historical standards they have. But tensions were on the rise last fall, fueled by press speculation that Clinton might replace Lake, Christopher or both. The suspicion boiled over in a suite at the Waldorf-Astoria, where the foreign policy team had gone to prepare for a meeting at the United Nations.Lake summoned two of Christopher's top assistants, Tom Donilon, his chief of staff, and Michael McCurry, now the White House press secretary. Shaking with anger, he accused them of planting stories designed to make him look bad; incredulous, the two men accused Lake and his staff of doing the same to Christopher. The three exploded and spent 10 minutes denouncing each other in language that could have made the wallpaper peel. Acknowledging that further warfare could sink them all, they agreed to a truce.  When talking on unsecured phones, McCurry and Donilon still sometimes refer to Lake as "our Waldorf friend." After learning that the story had spread, Lake raised the issue in mumbling embarrassment. "It did clear the air," he said.As Bosnia policy fell apart at the end of May, the Waldorf peace was put to the test. A new round of finger pointing broke out after the failed air strikes and hostage incidents. Lake called Donilon in alarm, and the two went on a press offensive, ordering subordinates to eliminate any talk of discord. At a meeting the following day, Lake cleared the room of lower-ranking aides and apologized to Christopher and several other senior officials for excluding them from a military briefing in the Oval Office, the move that had especially incensed the State Department. "It was very forthright for him to say that perhaps he'd missed a call," Christopher says.But whatever cease-fires were signed in Washington, the fighting in Bosnia was growing ever more horrific. My last extended conversation with Lake on Bosnia came in mid-June, about three weeks after air strikes. Though the violence was increasing in every direction, Lake was caught in what only can be described as wishful thinking. "One thing we can hope is that whole event will have led all the parties to take a look at what going over the edge could mean," he said. A few weeks later, the Serbs overran the so-called "safe areas" of Srebrenica and Zepa, sending tens of thousands of refugees pouring across the country and producing reports of mass executions; a few weeks after that, the Croats re-entered the spreading war.IT WAS A SUNDAY IN JUNE. LAKE HAD BEEN under great stress and his hernia operation had not helped. A few days earlier, he had recalled the famous David Levine cartoon of Lyndon Johnson lifting his shirt to display a scar in the shape of Vietnam. His scar, Lake joked, would look like Bosnia. Now it was noon; he had been at his desk since 8:30 that morning, trying to use the quiet hours to puzzle out a new approach. At one point, his pain grew so strong he had to close his eyes and put the discussion on hold. "I'm not hearing you," he said. Like many others, I pointed out that the NATO bombings had not just failed but had done so in a completely predictable way. Hadn't Lake himself stood in the Oval Office talking of hostages? His temper momentarily flared. "Gee, you mean something that was done in Bosnia didn't achieve perfect success?" he said sarcastically. "If that's your criterion, then you stop trying anything."It's true that Bosnia presents a menu of rotten choices and Lake is the one who has to choose. "Do you judge foreign policy makers on the basis of their intentions or on the consequences of their actions?" Lake said, framing the question himself. "In Vietnam, especially, the refuge was always taken in intentions: 'We are fighting for democracy; we are fighting for this; we are fighting for that -- therefore, don't blame us.' And that's much too low a standard. On the other hand, to hold foreign policy makers completely accountable is probably also unfair, because the consequences are so often uncertain. What we can ask -- absolutely -- is that they think about those consequences as hard as they can. And, secondly, that they do so in real terms, which is to say the impact on human lives. That we can ask."With a little literary license, the Bosnian translation might go something like this: Don't credit him simply for meaning well or blame him for everything that goes wrong. Ask whether at a given moment, in a complicated world, his decisions had a reasonable chance of bridging American interests and ideals. Lake would not say whether he was meeting his own standards, but he did have a kind of tacit response. "I'm really worried that Bosnia will again come to be the definition of American foreign policy and obscure all the other things we've done much better."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on August 20, 1995, on Page 6006033 of the National edition with the headline: THE MAN INSIDE BILL CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

DEAR DIARY:I was recently cast in a role for the NBC-TV soap opera "Another World." To get from my Manhattan apartment to the Brooklyn studio early in the morning, I was told by the production office to meet a car at a midtown corner where two other actors would be waiting to share my ride. When the car was 15 minutes late, I became anxious.A couple approached me, looking equally anxious. Assuming these were my fellow actors, I said "Excuse me, but are you from 'Another World?' " The woman, speaking in heavily accented English, said, "Yes, we are." The man, with an even heavier accent, said, "We are from Europe."I tried to explain that "Another World" meant television, but then my car came with my fellow actors already aboard. I got in and watched the thoroughly confused European tourists cross the street. KIM SYKES                    . . .Dorothy Strohl's daughter Roberta, an oncology nurse clinician, returned recently from an international congress in New Delhi. A neighbor in Whiting, N.J., asked Mrs. Strohl where Roberta had been lately.Advertisement"She was in India and saw the Taj Mahal," Mrs. Strohl said."Oh," the neighbor said. "So she went to Atlantic City, too."                    . . .J. S. Robards walks to and from his office through Central Park and particularly enjoys the stretch under the canopy of trees on the Literary Walk near the band shell, often watching people running their dogs or playing on the grass within the fences that encircle groups of the elm trees. One morning a sign appeared. ATTENTION: THE ELM ISLANDS ARE NOT OPEN TO THE PUBLICMr. Robards is curious. The Elm Islands? A Caribbean nation? A group of atolls in the South Pacific? Why are they closed? Fallout from nuclear tests? A nature sanctuary? And why advertise this in Central Park?                    . . .       Dear Diary:I have a part-time receptionist job at a West Side heritage center. When our computer's phone line went dead, I called telephone repair. Not able to get through, I dialed "0" for operator. The conversation went something like this:Operator: Nynex. May I help you?Me: I'm unable to reach your repair department. What should I dial?Operator: 611.Me: No wonder I had trouble. I was dialing 711.Operator: You call them when you want milk! ROSALYN L. TUTON                    . . .Dennis B. Appleton was visiting a friend in a midtown office building when he observed the elevator's worn-looking "door close" button and the almost pristine "door open" button.As he ascended, Mr. Appleton ruminated on untold numbers of passengers with an "I'm in a rush -- consideration be damned -- let's get going" mentality.His hope is that someday the situation will be reversed and "that future urban archeologists will reflect on New Yorkers' patient and considerate nature, exhibited by holding the door for their fellow workers."                    . . .Tom Collins of Bethlehem, Pa., telephoned a Manhattan department store to follow up on an order he had placed for china. He reached a manager, who said cheerfully: "Would you mind calling back tomorrow? I'm too busy to discuss this right now. It's Customer Appreciation Day."                    . . .       Dear Diary:I was riding the evening bus back to Lyndhurst, N.J., past a faux-castle restaurant called Medieval Times. A young boy asked his father, "What's that?""That's supposed to be a castle," his father explained. "Before guns were invented, people used bows and arrows and swords. They'd climb up to the turret to look out for enemies, then they'd shoot them with bows and arrows."Advertisement"Oh," the boy said. "Was that in the 80's?" EVE GOLDENWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 1995, on Page C00002 of the National edition with the headline: Metropolitan Diary. 
President Clinton said today that he would support efforts to rid the Middle East of nuclear weapons after peace is achieved there, a promise that appeared to have eased tensions between the United States and Egypt over Israel's reported nuclear arsenal.Mr. Clinton made the commitment at a meeting with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, who until recently had threatened to block the American-led quest to extend indefinitely the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons. Mr. Mubarak had pointed to Israel's refusal to sign the document as reason for his concerns about it, but he signaled after his talks with Mr. Clinton that he was now prepared to accept it."We have no problem even with the United States," Mr. Mubarak said when asked about the past disagreement. The Egyptian leader described renewal of the 25-year-old nuclear nonproliferation treaty, or N.P.T., as important "for the welfare of the whole world and the new world order."Only last month, Egypt had said that it would refuse to support renewal of the treaty until it is signed by Israel. That would require Israel to submit to immediate inspections of its nuclear installations, a step that Israel has said it cannot accept while its relations with its neighbors remain so uncertain.AdvertisementThe Egyptian threat was echoed by other Arab countries, and it appeared to jeopardize prospects for the treaty's renewal.But Egypt's stance has softened in the face of heavy lobbying from the United States, Japan and others. And after Mr. Clinton indicated that he would support efforts to persuade Israel to surrender its nuclear weapons in the future, Mr. Mubarak expressed some willingness today to accommodate the Israeli position."We are not asking them to join the N.P.T. now or tomorrow," Mr. Mubarak said of Israel at a joint news conference with Mr. Clinton. The Egyptian leader disclosed that his Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, would meet in Paris on Thursday with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel to discuss nuclear issues, and he said he hoped that "with the help of the United States we could narrow the gap."The Administration has urged Israel to sign the nuclear accord. But it has not pressed that campaign, and it has said it would not be appropriate to link renewal of the treaty to any timetable for Israeli acquiescence.But Mr. Clinton's comments today served to send a somewhat stronger signal to Tel Aviv. Asked by an Egyptian reporter what the United States could do to help maintain Egypt's national security, Mr. Clinton said he had told Mr. Mubarak that he believed "that the Middle East should be free of all weapons of mass destruction: nuclear, biological, chemical."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."We realize that we deal with the history and the facts of the countries as we find them, that it cannot be done overnight," Mr. Clinton said. "But that must be our goal, and we must be working on that."Israel has not confirmed or denied that it has a nuclear arsenal. But American officials say it is likely that Israel has some 200 nuclear weapons, as well as stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons.Mr. Mubarak did not say explicitly today that his country would support the permanent and unconditional extension of the nuclear accord, as the United States is pushing. Under the terms of the treaty, only the United States, Russia, Britain, France and China are allowed to have nuclear weapons; a number of third world countries led by Mexico and Nigeria have argued that it should be extended only for a limited term.But senior Administration officials including Robert Pelletreau, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, said they were pleased by the tone of Mr. Mubarak's statements. They also made clear that the United States was actively encouraging the new nuclear talks between Egypt and Israel.AdvertisementWith the international conference on the renewal of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty scheduled to open on April 17 in New York, Mr. Clinton also reiterated today an American pledge not to launch nuclear attacks against countries that have no nuclear weapons and agree not to acquire them.The statement reaffirmed a pledge made in 1978 by the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union, and was intended to minimize nonnuclear countries' concerns about extension of the treaty under which they must forswear any nuclear ambitions.The meetings between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Mubarak came as the United States has renewed its efforts in the Middle East to forge a peace between Israel and Syria. Both leaders spoke today with some urgency about that quest, which has led Mr. Clinton to dispatch Dennis B. Ross, the special Middle East coordinator, to the region."I think President Assad does want peace, and I think Prime Minister Rabin wants peace," Mr. Clinton said of the Syrian and Israeli leaders. But with elections approaching in both the United States and Israel, Mr. Clinton said "it is important that they reach an agreement fairly soon."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 1995, on Page A00012 of the National edition with the headline: Clinton Backs Drive Against Nuclear Arms in Mideast. 
POP quiz. Kafiristan is:a.) the closest neighbor of this struggling new Central Asian democracy.b.) a region within Russia that has tried three times since 1991 to secede.c.) the most radical region of nearby Tajikistan, where civil war has raged for three years.d.) none of the above.If you chose correctly you may know more about movies than you do about this part of the world. Kafiristan, as any true Rudyard Kipling or John Huston fan would know, was the mythical, remote kingdom at the center of the Kipling story (and 1975 film) "The Man Who Would Be King."For that reason it may be better known than all the other "stans" -- Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan -- that together make up the new states of Central Asia.AdvertisementTo outsiders, even those who live in Moscow, which until recently governed this part of the world, it can often be difficult distinguishing one stan (or land, in the Turkic languages) from the next. But since they are spread across one of the most politically volatile spots on earth, and since their vast natural wealth and strategic location has always drawn the attention of the world's powers, it may be worth a try.Smuggling"We are the center of Central Asia," said Zafar Ruzeyev, spokesman for the Uzbek Foreign Ministry. "Our borders and our history touch the others. So does our soul."The last part may not be true. But the instability, poverty and location of the countries of Central Asia as neighbors to powers like Russia, China, Turkey and Iran guarantee their importance. There is intense competition for influence here, principally between the religious republic of Iran and the secular nation of Turkey.Despite a common tendency toward authoritarianism and a growing devotion to Islam, it is amazing how different these countries, which for centuries were Muslim khanates linking the often-warring worlds of Europe and Asia, have turned out to be.One thing they share is an increasingly evident lawlessness. Drugs have become the biggest cash crop in neighboring Afghanistan -- and the only way to get it to consumers is through Central Asia, which has become the route of choice for some of the world's biggest opium smugglers.And they share agricultural problems, because the Soviet Union essentially treated them as plantations. Uzbekistan in particular is an environmentally ravaged, culturally rich police state. The Aral Sea, a salt slick that disappears more rapidly each year, is one of the world's worst ecological disasters. The Uzbek President, Islam Karimov, who recently called a Soviet-style election to keep himself in office until the year 2000, has abolished free opposition, imprisoned rivals and banished opponents.But many Western politicians prefer him to his neighbor, the authoritarian leader of Turkmenistan, Saparmurat Niyazov, who prefers the name of Turkmenbashi (Father of all Turkmen). In oil-rich Kazakhstan, Nursultan Narzarbayev recently disbanded his Parliament and has moved to extend his rule without the bother of general elections."They are all finding out how difficult it is to live alone," said a Russian diplomat, hoping, as many of his colleagues do, that some of these countries will seek shelter in a reconstituted union. "We gave them things they could never get themselves."AdvertisementThat, however, included inefficient factories in the mountains here that could never make money in a free market economy, and a reliance on cotton in Uzbekistan that has ravaged its fertile soil.The people who live here virtually disappeared from view during Soviet rule. The great Muslim shrines at Samarkand and Bukhara have never been nearly as heavily visited as less significant places in more accessible areas, despite the devotion of the people of Central Asia. Most of what is known about this region comes from dusty histories, a worn rug handed down through ancestors and romantic visions of camels, minarets and extended steppes.Central Asia is difficult to understand, because it straddles where East melds into West. Almost every type of government exists here. There are consulting firms making huge profits on oil deals in Almaty and women worshiping fire in Ashkhabad. In Kyrgyzstan, opium and marijuana growing and smuggling are the most promising sources of income. Turkmen culture has long been nomadic and proud of it. In Uzbekistan the khanates have looked down on nomads for 2,000 years.'It's Hard'The thing about the stans that keeps Russia and the West nervous is that they could be much more dangerous than they are. When the Soviet Union dissolved, many analysts thought religious fundamentalism would take root here. But Islam, the predominant religion in the region, has yet to explode as a major political force. Here in Kyrgyzstan, which optimists describe as the Switzerland of Central Asia, and where hatwear runs to exotic caps that look like they belong in the Alps, people are trying hard to create a democracy."We are trying to do it the way they do it in the West," said Abdi Satarof, head of the main local TV station in Osh, which has been plagued by a huge increase in corruption and drug trafficking. "But we don't have the resources that Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan have. So it's hard."It is, but spend some time in the region and you will quickly notice the difference between freedom and chains. People here are cheerier than their neighbors in the much richer, more powerful country of Uzbekistan, the currency is more stable and the newspapers print something other that the President's assertions that life is grand.Kazakhstan has had the fortune to be the home of a nuclear arsenal that has demanded the attention of the people who run the world; through a complicated process initiated in the United States, it is now almost completely dismantled and stored in Russia. To the relief of the West, Uzbekistan -- the most populous country in the region -- has not become a committed fundamentalist Islamic nation like the most threatening stan of all, Afghanistan, which borders all of the other stans except Kazakhstan.Tajikistan is now engaged in a fraternal war that has made it easier for the leaders of the region's other countries to demand peace and obedience. It also threatens to pull Russia, whose border guards are frequently killed there, into yet another war its citizens would probably not support.And the people live like they always have. They grill lamb every day, eat a spicy dish called plov and drink as much tea as anyone in Asia. After living with despots for 2,500 years, they don't generally waste time worrying about their rulers. "We care about eating well and sleeping well," said Murmayan Homanisan, an Uzbek cotton farmer. "I don't care who is president or what country this is. I never did before. As long as I can eat, work and be with my family they can do what they want."An article on May 7 about the Central Asian lands whose names end in "stan" referred incorrectly to Kafiristan. It is the former name of a region of northeastern Afghanistan, not an imaginary place invented by Rudyard Kipling.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 1995, on Page 4004003 of the National edition with the headline: The World; Meet Stan, and Stan, and . . . 
EVANGELINE BRUCE has been called many things in her 70-odd years -- beauty, fashion plate, consummate diplomat's wife, American society's last empress -- but no label rankles more than what she calls the "H" word."Hostess -- that one I really resent," she says, walking into the drawing room of her Federal house in Georgetown, where she has lived for more than 20 years. In one hand is a pair of reading glasses; in the other, a silver cachepot filled with broccoli, which she sets down on a gessoed table as casually as a vase of daisies. Vegetables as accessories is a Bruce hallmark, like the extravagantly patterned stockings designed to accentuate her long legs -- today, broad black stripes -- and the soft, husky voice, pitched somewhere between a whisper and a promise."Presumably, the word means you have people in for food and drink," Mrs. Bruce continues, settling her spare, 5-foot-9 3/4-inch frame into the pillowy depths of a chartreuse sofa. "By that measure, I suppose most people have been hostesses at one time or another."Now, a new "H" word takes effect: historian.On Monday, "Napoleon and Josephine: An Improbable Marriage" (Lisa Drew/Scribner, $30), Evangeline Bruce's first effort as a biographer, makes its debut. And since she has written only a handful of magazine articles over the years, the appearance of a 555-page book has ignited a subdued trans-Atlantic frenzy of interest and incredulity.AdvertisementThe acerbic British journalist Alexander Chancellor, an old friend, reportedly burst out laughing when he heard about it, calling the news "a demented fantasy." A broad grin bisects Mrs. Bruce's solemn visage, animating the elongated planes that an admirer once compared to a fragment of Cycladic sculpture. "I can quite understand the reaction," she adds.The dual biography is not the basic taxidermied homage. More than 20 years in the making, Mrs. Bruce's book on the Bonapartes and their era is always amusing, often ribald and resolutely Mitfordian: breasts heave, bribes abound, coups percolate, ships wreck, men ogle, ladies scheme and absurdities abound. The protagonists shuttle between the battlefield and the bedroom, while around them swirls the maelstrom of post-revolutionary Paris, where women ruled and politicians paid attention.Evangeline Bruce is handling her friends' chortles with grace. She is well aware that her fame rests in decidedly nonscholastic pursuits. There is that sense of style (she's a best-dressed Hall of Famer), the quietly luxurious homes (London, Georgetown, the south of France), and of course, the legendary soirees, where boldface names chow down on sweet bacon hors d'oeuvres: John Wells, Katharine Graham, Vernon Jordan, David Brinkley, Edna O'Brien, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Arianna Stassinopolous Huffington.Then, there is the husband.David K. E. Bruce, whom the former Evangeline Bell married in 1945, after his divorce from the heiress Ailsa Mellon, served as United States envoy to France, Germany, Britain, China and NATO in a diplomatic career that began in the 1920's.  Urbane and arguably America's most popular postwar ambassador, he died in 1977 at 79.Snapshots of Bruce with Churchill, Lyndon B. Johnson and John F. Kennedy are clustered on tables in the main drawing room of the Georgetown house. Fringed silk-taffeta curtains designed by the late, great English decorator John Fowler pour down tawny-pink walls, past big murky paintings. Next to the fireplace stands what may be the largest ficus tree in captivity, bathed in the nurturing glow of grow lights. A backyard vista of box hedges and bamboo can be seen from any of the room's 5 sofas and 10 chairs.The idea for "Napoleon and Josephine" germinated in 1973, when the couple was stationed in Beijing for 18 months. In earlier times and more sophisticated locales, official duties and the raising of three children -- Sasha, David and Nicholas -- kept Evangeline Bruce busy from 8 in the morning until after dark. In China, however, she says, "I had a lot of time on my hands." What she wrote was a day-by-day account of "my favorite year," 1795, when the French monarchy fell and was replaced by a utopian vision of liberty, equality and fraternity.Family problems interrupted the project, however. In 1975, after the Bruces moved to Brussels on assignment to NATO, Sasha, their 28-year-old daughter, was discovered under a tree at the family's Virginia estate, dying from a gunshot wound. Her husband of three months, a Greek citizen, fled the United States but was later indicted for murder. He has since eluded extradition.Four years ago, Mrs. Bruce -- who founded Sasha Bruce Youthwork, a Washington organization for runaways and abused teen-agers -- pulled out the manuscript and went back to work.AdvertisementThough she admits that the subject of the book is timeworn, the execution is not. "I've added nothing really," the author says, "except maybe an original way of looking at the period." Thanks to her fascination with the tempestuous culture outside the palace gates -- from fashion to decoration to politics to literary movements -- "Napoleon and Josephine" resembles "Bonfire of the Vanities" more than it does "Masterpiece Theater.""In 1795, after the Revolution, everything in France seemed so new," says Mrs. Bruce, a diplomat's daughter who lived in a dozen countries before going to Radcliffe in 1937 to study Chinese history and French literature. "Suddenly, as if overnight, everyone ate differently, thought differently, dressed differently. The way women wore their clothes paralleled the political climate. Even the names of the months were changed to reflect this democratic optimism."That's what captivates me -- the period, the cultural explosions, not Napoleon. I've just used the marriage as a frame. That way, I could cannibalize all my prior research, all the things I'm fascinated by."Which explains why for every mention of a battle plan, there is a lively excursion into the heart of fin-de-siecle Paris society, notably into the salon of Madame de Stael, the pugnacious, intellectual wife of the Swedish Ambassador. "I have a weakness for her," Mrs. Bruce says. "Everything about her is so gigantic and touching and endearing. It must have been awful to have been her lover."And then, for bodice-ripping effect, there is always Josephine's upwardly mobile, soap opera-style love life. "She was a master at bringing herself to the attention of people who mattered," Mrs. Bruce says. Then there are Napoleon's passionate pornographic letters to his future wife."Hortense, her daughter, bowdlerized them," says Mrs. Bruce, who went back to the original manuscripts, love notes that in the book she archly describes as "illegible bursts of disconcerting idolatry." In most biographies of the emperor, she adds, "One of the letters is always translated as Napoleon dreams of being 'with Josephine.' What he really wrote was that he dreamed of being 'inside Josephine.' " She claps her hands. "Don't you think that's delightful?"Another book, however, is not in the author's plans. "Oh, God, no," Mrs. Bruce says, shaking her head. Silence falls, a steady rain begins to fall. The long legs uncross, and then she stands up, swinging the reading glasses from side to side, an inscrutable smile on her lips. "Well, let's not think about it right now."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 1995, on Page C00001 of the National edition with the headline: AT HOME WITH: Evangeline Bruce; The Improbable Author. 
International A3-10  A COLD WIND IN CENTRAL ASIA  Hundreds of thousands of ethnic Russians in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan are moving to Russia in one of the largest migrations since the cold war's end.  A1CHINA SEEKS TRADE TALKS  China asked United States negotiators to resume talks on the piracy of American-made music, movies and software, two days after being slapped with punitive tariffs against more than $1 billion in goods.  A1  JAPAN ON THE MEND  Nearly three weeks after last month's earthquake ripped through the Kobe region of western Japan, the pace of the area's recovery is dizzying.  A3  FRENCH SPLIT OVER ALGERIA  A proposal for a conference to help end Algeria's war against Islamic militants put France's President at odds with the Algerian leadership and the French Government.  A6  Lech Walesa insisted that his opponents pick a path or step down.  A6  An accord allowed Sarajevans to leave the Bosnian capital.  A7  The Clinton Administration resisting efforts to cut foreign aid.  A8  A record number of journalists were killed working last year.  A8  Gunmen killed an Israeli security guard on the Gaza Strip.  A10  Salta Journal: A money tree withers in backwoods Argentina.  A4  National A12-22, B9  REPUBLICANS PASS LINE-ITEM VETO  The Republican House of Representatives voted to give the Democratic President a line-item veto, the authority to strike parts of bills passed by Congress without vetoing an entire piece of legislation.  A1  A NEW AND IMPROVED STAR WARS  Twelve years after Ronald Reagan proposed his anti-missile system that cost $36 billion and ultimately built nothing, Republicans are pressing to revive it.  A20  CLINTON TO HOLD BUDGET STEADY  The President sent his $1.6 trillion budget to a skeptical Congress, and vowed to control, if not reduce, the Federal deficit.  A22  The budget will hit New York's transit system users hardest.  A22  'THEATER OF THE BIZARRE'  Two weeks after opening arguments, and after seven months of exhaustive advance publicity, the O. J. Simpson trial has become an American cultural event.  A1  SIMPSON'S 'FRIGHTENING LOOK'  Hours before Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend were found murdered, O. J. Simpson was unusually agitated and preoccupied, two witnesses testified.  A16  ANTI-GANG FASHION LAW  In Harvard, Illinois, a person can be arrested for wearing a Star of David, a sports team logo or any symbol hijacked by street gangs and turned into gang symbols.  A12  THE QUALITY OF CHILD CARE  Poor care threatens children's intellectual and emotional development, according to a study of hundreds of child care centers.  A12  F.A.A. WAS AWARE OF VIOLATIONS  The F.A.A. had privately concluded that there were safety violations at B&L Aviation, whose plane crash killed three doctors and is at the center of allegations involving Senator Thomas Daschle.  A15  PREFERENCE LAWS AT RISK?  As Republican Congressional leaders consider revising affirmative action policies, advocates are having nervous days.  B9  Amtrak will continue to deteriorate unless further cuts are made.  A21  Metro Digest B1  GUILTY PLEA IN TERRORISM TRIAL  The defense suffered a major blow in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 other men when a key defendant changed his plea to guilty and said he may testify against the others.  A1  COLD SPELL SWEEPS INTO REGION  Fierce cold weather hit the region on the heels of the winter's worst snowstorm, causing delays for commuters. The temperature dipped to 5 degrees in Central Park.  A1  Science Times C1-12  RENDEZVOUS IN SPACE  An American space shuttle flew to a rendezvous with the Russian space station, a significant step in cooperation in a multibillion-dollar project to send an international space station into orbit.  A1  A submarine will scan the sea floor for Roman wrecks.  C1  Obituaries B10  James Merrill, poet.   Business Digest D1  Fashion Page B11  Neediest Cases B2  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Cathedral models as stunning as the real thing.  C13  Oliver Sacks on call.  C13  Warhol museum head announces resignation.  C13  Theater: "Uncle Bob." C14  "Small Lives/Big Dreams." C14  TV: Did PBS show cowardice about book on F.B.I.?  C18  Sports B12-19  Baseball: Mediator asks Clinton for more time.  B13  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  The President's sensible budget.  Poland: Democracy's problems.  The Mayor and the storm.  Pataki's Port Authority problem.  Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: History is today.  Robert M. Morgenthau: What prosecutors won't tell you.  Sarah Anderson and John Cavanagh: Nafta's unhappy anniversary. Chronicle B9 Chess C12 Crossword C18We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 1995, on Page A00002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
International A3-11  REBELS STILL TORMENT CAMBODIATwo decades after they set in motion a peasant revolution that may have killed more than one million Cambodians, the Khmer Rouge and their leader, Pol Pot, continue to torment Cambodia.  A1CHINA'S LEADERSHIP IS QUESTIONEDNews analysis: Chinese and Western officials are beginning to ask whether President Jiang Zemin is mishandling Beijing's relations with the U.S.  A1  SHIFTING PRODUCTION SITESA day after the U.S. imposed trade sanctions against China, some American companies said they would switch production to other Asian nations, while others expected a resolution of the dispute.  A1  AN EMERGING MARKET IN INDIAAs India emerges from 40 years of socialist economic policies, U.S. companies have become leading investors in many sectors.  D1  DOUBTS ON ALEXANDER'S TOMBAdvertisementGreek archeologists investigating claims that the tomb of Alexander the Great has been discovered visited the site in Egypt and said that they saw no evidence that the tomb has been found.  A8  YUGOSLAV HELICOPTERS IN BOSNIAThe U.N. reported seeing 15 Serbian helicopters, apparently on a resupply mission, cross into Bosnia, suggesting that the Yugoslav Army is still involved in the war.  A3  Bosnian Muslims and Croats reaffirm their federation.  A3  ISRAEL REAFFIRMS ENTRY BANAlthough slightly loosening its restrictions, Israel reaffirmed an entry ban that has kept tens of thousands of Palestinians from work since suicide bombers killed 21 Israelis two weeks ago.  A8  Talks to halt fighting between Peru and Ecuador collapse.  A5  Mexico's impatience with rebels in the south is growing.  A8  Guerrillas took responsibility for a blast that killed 42 in Algeria.  A11  Abidjan Journal: African deportees and regional cooperation.  A4  National A12-15  A BALANCED BUDGET AT ALL COSTSAs Bill Clinton plans his bid to shave $144 billion from Federal spending in his budget plan, the Republican Congress is preparing to meet that and trim several hundred billion dollars more, somehow.  A1  THE POLITICS OF FARM SUBSIDIESArlington, Kan., the center of America's wheat empire, is bracing for a political fight over farm subsidies as the more conservative Congress begins working on a new farm policy law, the first since 1990.  A1  RISING AMENDMENT OPPOSITIONPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Washington Talk: With more time and tactical possibilities in the Senate, the Democrats opposition to the balanced-budget amendment may be showing signs of life.  A14  SPACE RENDEZVOUS REVISEDThe space shuttle Discovery's leaky thruster forced ground controllers in Houston, Tex., and Kaliningrad, Russia, to revise plans for a rendezvous between the spaceship and Russia's space station.  A12  A WOMAN'S FIGHT TO END HUNGERCarol Doe Porter's organization, Kidcare Inc., delivers 18,000 meals a month to the poor in Houston, every one prepared in their small home's pantry.  A12  RACIAL TENSIONS IN PRISONAlthough violence in the nation's prisons has decreased in recent years, racial tensions have risen. In Los Angeles, conflicts between Hispanics and blacks are high.  A13  NOMINEE'S APPOINTMENT AT RISKAdvertisementPresident Clinton's choice for Surgeon General came under more scrutiny, as the top two Republican leaders in the Senate said the appointment was in trouble.  A15  Metro Digest B1  AVIARY AT BRONX ZOO COLLAPSESThe aviary at the Bronx Zoo, a landmark to generations of New Yorkers, collapsed during Saturday's storm, and dozens of rare, exotic gulls and terns flew away, zoo officials said yesterday.  A1  HARD LABOR IN THE GARMENT SHOPSMore than a century after Jacob Riis first chronicled dangerous conditions and exploitative labor practices in apparel factories on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, sweatshops still flourish.  A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Making "White Man's Burden." C11  Change of focus for Louvre's new director.  C11  Theater: "Merchant of Venice." C11  Music: Anne-Sophie Mutter.  C14  Mikel Rouse's "Failing Kansas." C12  Books: "Between Friends." C18  Television: "Inside the F.B.I." C16  "Serving in Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story." C16 Sports C1-9  Baseball: Clinton about to enter strike talks.  C1  O'Neill yearns to play.  C2  Basketball: Knicks fall to Magic in overtime.  C1  Columns: Anderson on Rangers.  C4  Rhoden on UConn basketball.  C6  On Baseball.  C2  On Pro Basketball.  C7  Tennis: U.S. advances.  C6  Track: When coach and family collide.  C3  Neediest Cases B2  Obituaries B8  Patricia Highsmith, author.   Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  A smart move on China.  Hold that line-item.  A new charter on Legal Aid.  Letters  William Safire: . . . and they're off!  Anthony Lewis: The lost leader.  Irvin B. Nathan: Trial by ambush.  John Kenneth Galbraith: Our forked tongue. Bridge C18  Chronicle B5  Crossword C12We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 1995, on Page A00002 of the National edition with the headline: NEWS SUMMARY. 
SOME things are just too painful to remember -- like the 1970's. Sure, "Saturday Night Live" was funny back then. But Barry Manilow was king, pet rocks were hot and everyone who was anyone sported a white suit spun from petroleum distillates. As for investing, well, double-digit inflation, the energy crisis and the 1973-74 stock market meltdown made it, for most people, a decade to forget.But there was one way to make big bucks in the '70's -- and like John Travolta, Jimmy Carter and the entire egregious Brady Bunch, it seems to be making a comeback. The trick, back then, was to invest in "stuff" -- art and real estate and diamonds, but especially the things that Wall Street lumps together and calls "commodities," like pork bellies and gold bullion and soy beans and barrels of oil.After a decade when nobody would touch the stuff, some of the best brains on Wall Street are starting to buzz that commodities, not stocks or bonds, may well turn out to be the best investments of the late 90's. A few are expecting inflation to soar, and that's often when commodities prosper. But most investment seers cite other reasons for a commodities comeback, including the falling dollar, demand from countries like China and India -- and that some commodities are just plain cheap.But one thing has not changed much since the 70's -- commodities remain a very hard game for the amateur investor to play. Traditionally, commodities trade in the futures and options markets, arcane arenas where timing is tricky and the costs can eat you alive. (In three days last month, one Connecticut man lost two-thirds of his stake -- mostly in commissions.) Pros, in fact, commonly assert that 70 to 90 percent of amateur investors lose money in futures and options -- with Hillary Rodham Clinton's success being the exception that proves the rule.AdvertisementSo it may sound as if Wall Street is planning a party and you're not invited. But if you buy the commodities story, and that's a big if, there are some admittedly imperfect but less expensive ways to act on your beliefs. And you can bet that if investing in stuff really takes off, the folks who brought you mutual funds will be quick to find a way to help you invest in commodities, too (for a fee, of course).Of course, plenty of astute investors just do not believe commodities are poised for an upswing, and even some believers still suspect that stocks and bonds will be better investments. After all, commodities have been in a bear market that has lasted, depending on which thing you pick, from 14 to 23 years. In fact, over the very long haul, commodities have proved to be a pretty bad bet; according to Morgan Stanley, if in 1945 you had put your money in oil, copper, grains, livestock and the like, your returns would have trailed all other investments.BUT at times commodity prices really cook. Everyone old enough to drive in the 70's remembers the oil crisis; between 1972 and 1981, the price of fuel soared more than 250 percent. But that wasn't all. Industrial commodities -- things like copper and aluminum and tin -- almost tripled, and food prices more than doubled.And the late 1990's may present another golden opportunity -- at least that's the view of some seers. One is James Rogers, who in partnership with the trading wizard George Soros made a mint in the 70's. Today, Mr. Rogers is a professor at Columbia University, the host of a show on CNBC and the author of a financial guide cum travelogue called "Investment Biker."As in the 70's, he said, there is too much money floating around in the world -- a sure recipe for inflation, some economists say. But another crucial factor in the inflation of the 70's, he added, was that the supply of raw materials dried up when African countries went from being exporters to importers.A supply disruption is also likely today -- from the nations that made up the old Soviet Union, which are running out of stuff to export.In general, he added, low raw-materials prices in recent decades have discouraged investments in new production. "I bet nobody has said they have a cannot-miss deal in a sugar plantation," he said, "and if anyone has come to you with a hot tin mine, I'd be surprised."Demand for raw materials, gold and other commodities will also increase as "less developed" countries start to catch up. "The two billion people in India and China each use one barrel of oil a year, while in Taiwan they use 11 and in the U.S. they each use 33," said Mark Holowesko, president of Templeton, Galbraith & Hansberger Ltd., which manages the Templeton mutual funds.AdvertisementInflation weighs on the minds of money managers like William Fleckenstein, a principal of Olympic Capital Management of Seattle, which invests more than $1 billion. "People believe in stocks and bonds, and they believe in the chairman" -- Alan Greenspan, that is, of the Federal Reserve -- and his ability to engineer an economic slowdown that will spark neither inflation nor recession, Mr. Fleckenstein said. "The case for commodities is, What if everybody gets it wrong?"Robert A. Beckwitt does not expect a surge in inflation, and he finds it hard to bet on the future of China and Russia. But as manager of Fidelity Investments' giant Asset Manager funds, he has made some commodity-linked investments as insurance, and suggests that 5 to 10 percent of a portfolio might belong in such investments."Inflation is low, and while it could go down to 1 percent, it could also go to 6 percent," he noted. "How do I invest and make money in a period when inflation goes from 3 percent to 6 percent? Commodities are one of the few things you know that correlate with inflation."FINALLY, some investment gurus favor commodities simply because they have been beaten down for so long -- and Wall Street firmly believes that every dog, eventually, has its day. True, some commodity prices are not as low as they were just a year or two ago. Last spring, as investors started to believe the economy was strong and inflation might be rising, many prices shot up, particularly for materials used by industry (think copper and aluminum). The commonly used Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 items zoomed 10 percent in less than two months.But that rally soon ran out of steam. Only cotton has continued to climb (each commodity moves on its own special circumstances, often including the weather). Overall, the index has gained just 3 percent in 12 months. That pattern of sharp gains followed by partial fallbacks, which analysts call a stairstep rally, is likely to continue into the end of the century, said William B. O'Neill, senior futures strategist for Merrill Lynch & Company.Last year's price increases, along with the prospect of slower growth worldwide, have put a bit of a damper on enthusiasm for commodities at Goldman, Sachs & Company, the investment bank and brokerage that caters to companies and professional investors, which was more bullish last year. "Commodity prices in general are not in a bear market, and a few got rather rambunctious," said Abby Joseph Cohen, co-chairman of the firm's investment policy committee. Nevertheless, she suggests that clients put 5 percent of their portfolios into commodities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some money managers prefer to look at particular commodities. And in some cases they are finding very attractive bargains.Michael J. Harkins, president of Levy, Harkins & Company in New York, is bullish on gold, oil and real estate, "because of the extreme lows that you can buy stuff for," he said.Right now, it would be hard to find anything more disdained by amateur investors than commodities. "Going back, people did speculate more in commodities, but the game has changed now," said John Markese, president of the American Association of Individual Investors.AdvertisementAnd frankly, that's the way it should be, say most financial planners. "I don't think individuals have any business playing the commodities game, because it's a suckers' game," said Jonathan Pond, who through his many television appearances and books serves as a sort of financial planner to the masses.Most financial advisers recommend steering clear of the futures markets, which can prove treacherous even for experts.FUTURES markets were set up in the 19th century to let farmers lower their risks by arranging at planting time the prices they would get at harvest. But the futures exchanges have evolved into places for very short-term speculation (indeed, the longest futures "contract" -- the security you buy -- lasts only a year).For a small down payment, you can control a lot of something. Right now, an investment of less than $2,000 will let you trade more than $10,000 worth of crude oil. But if that $10,000 drops sharply -- to, say, $7,000 -- you will have to put up more money to cover the $3,000 loss. That is how you can end up losing far more than your original investment.Another difficulty: it can be hard to bail out when you want to, like when the market is going down. There are strict limits on how much commodity prices can change in a day, "and if the market moves more than the limit, you can't get out," Mr. Markese said.Then there are the trading costs. Barry J. Lind, chairman of Lind-Waldock, a discount futures broker in Chicago, estimates that of the money his customers put up, 10 percent goes to commissions. Thus whatever they invest in has to rise 10 percent before they break even.Among the shadier operators, the costs to investors can be far higher. Take the experience of the unfortunate man from Connecticut, who does not want his name used. He heard a radio commercial about the big profits to be made trading commodities (unleaded gas and orange juice appear to be the favorite come-ons), and after some discussion with a small brokerage firm, he opened an account with $18,000.He bought options, which let you bet on future prices. His silver options went up, so his broker suggested selling, that same day. He did, but somehow the price wasn't as high as he had expected; after commissions, he ended up with a loss. He put the remaining money into copper, and after two days had a loss. After a third losing trade, in bond futures, he gave up. In less than a week, his $18,000 shrank to $6,000. And $8,000 of his loss went to commissions.AdvertisementAll of which helps explain why, if you walk into the office of a big, reputable broker like Merrill Lynch and say you want to invest in commodities, they may actually try to talk you out of it -- if you're lucky.Or, if you insist, they may recommend what is called a managed futures limited partnership. These are somewhat like mutual funds that invest in commodities, but with some big differences: it's hard to get your money out and these pools charge very high fees (the managers get a big cut of any profits). Regulation is lighter, and it's harder to find out how they are doing, or even what they invest in; many can speculate in all kinds of futures, including bonds and currencies.The other problem with managed accounts is that they focus on short-term trading gains, not long-term investments. For that, pros tend to turn to investments tied to the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index, which has a heavy weighting in energy and tends to move up and down with inflation. Carolyn Taylor, president of Weatherly Asset Management, which caters to wealthy individuals, said she is looking into bonds that move along with the index. Unfortunately for most people, these securities cost about $100,000. But Wall Street has some investment pools in the works that may let less wealthy people invest in these securities.FOR most investors, the easiest answer to investing in commodities may be found in a mutual fund. While few funds invest directly in "stuff," quite a few specialize in the stocks of commodities producers. This has its drawbacks; Susan Bender, senior editor of the No-Load Fund Analyst Newsletter, points out that these funds tend to move more like the rest of the stock market, and less like inflation hedges. On the other hand, they are much less likely to wipe investors out.In general, they can give a cautious investor a little exposure, and that may well be enough. Between 1977 and 1980, T. Rowe Price's New Era fund -- which invests in natural-resources companies, among others -- had almost triple the return of the S&P 500 stock index. In the late 1980's, things got tougher for this fund, but it was still an improvement over commodities themselves.But now there seems at least the possibility that commodities will once more come into their own. Maybe not, but hey, hang on to that mood ring and the pet rock; they, too, may turn out to be worth a lot before too long.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 1995, on Page 3003001 of the National edition with the headline: INVESTING IT; What? Pork Bellies Back in Fashion?. 
Moving closer to its goal of a larger United States presence, Luxottica S.p.A., the Italian eyeglass maker, announced today that it had reached agreement to acquire the United States Shoe Corporation, which controls the Lenscrafters optical chain, in a deal valued at $1.4 billion.The deal, which ends a drawn-out feud for control of U.S. Shoe, came after Luxottica agreed late Sunday to raise its offer to $28 a share, $4 more a share than its original bid on March 1. Luxottica also said it intended to go through with U.S. Shoe's agreement to sell its footwear business to Nine West Group Inc. for $600 million.For Luxottica, the acquisition would represent a major step not only toward increasing deliveries, but also toward raising the visibility of its products in the United States. U.S. Shoe's eyeglass stores, Lenscrafters, Sight and Save and Optique, control about 5.4 percent of the total retail sales of optical products in the United States, which amounted to $12.9 billion in 1994.Luxottica's strength in the United States has been in the higher end of the eyewear market. Luxottica has about an 18 percent share of the American market for eyeglass frames in the medium- and upper-price ranges. According to Marge Axelrad, a vice president of the 20/20 Optical Group in New York, a trade publishing group, Luxottica's 1994 sales in North America of $199.2 million gave the company about a 10 percent share of the total eyeglass frame market, worth $1.87 billion.AdvertisementThe question for Luxottica executives now, said Connie Maneaty, an analyst with Bear, Stearns & Company who follows Luxottica, was "whether they can master the retailing."One challenge, analysts said, was disgruntlement among the 28,000 independent optical stores and opticians. Some independent retailers, which account for about 90 percent of Luxottica's North American sales, were upset by the takeover offer for Lenscrafters because a takeover would essentially mean that their major supplier, Luxottica, was now also becoming a major retailing competitor.Claudio Del Vecchio, who runs Luxottica's operations in North America, acknowledged that Luxottica faced opposition from independent retailers but said the company would seek to use Lenscrafters' marketing strength to raise the visibility of Luxottica products, thus helping the independents as well."Until we can prove this, not all may follow us," he said.Despite the hostile nature of the earlier takeover bid, said Mr. Del Vecchio, who is the son of the company founder, Luxottica would retain "the major part" of U.S. Shoe's present management."We are one of their largest suppliers," he said by phone from New York. "We know them well."In 1994, the company supplied about $5 million worth of frames to Lenscrafters, he said. Deliveries would increase as a result of the acquisition, he predicted, but he would not say by how much.Shares of U.S. Shoe surged today, rising $1, to $27.50, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange. Luxottica's American depository receipts -- securities distributed in the United States and backed by the foreign stock -- were unchanged at $34.875. Each A.D.R. represents one share. Shares of Nine West fell 37.5 cents, to $32.375.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Luxottica had been pressing U.S. Shoe shareholders to accept an offer of $24 a share, which valued the company at $1.1 billion. But U.S. Shoe's chairman, Bannus B. Hudson, asked shareholders to reject that bid in a vote that was to be held April 21. To bolster its argument that the company was worth more, U.S. Shoe announced in March that it had arranged the sale of its footwear business to Nine West of Stamford, Conn., for $600 million.Robert M. Burton, U.S. Shoe's spokesman, said the company was "very pleased" with the sweetened offer, but that a final decision depended on U.S. Shoe's board, which he said would decide on the offer "quickly."In addition to Lenscrafters, U.S. Shoe also owns several chains of women's apparel stores, including Casual Corner and Petite Sophisticate, and shoe store chains like Banister and Easy Spirit.AdvertisementMr. Del Vecchio said U.S. Shoe's apparel and shoe businesses "do not interest us," and that their sale would be "our No. 1 option."Italian newspaper reports had speculated that Luxottica might sell some of the apparel chains to Benetton, the leading Italian apparel retailer, with which the Del Vecchio family has close business ties. But, Mr. Del Vecchio said, "There is nothing yet definite."Founded by Mr. Del Vecchio's father, Leonardo Del Vecchio, Luxottica has seen its American sales blossom in recent years with licensed designer names like Giorgio Armani and Valentino.Luxottica reported profits of $77.5 million last year, a 26 percent increase over the year earlier, on group sales of $504.3 million.Analysts said today that Luxottica was forced to pursue the acquisition in part because of the recent growth of the low end of the eyeglass frame market, a growth that Lenscrafters fueled by selling cheap frames imported from Far Eastern countries like China and Taiwan. With its products aimed primarily at the middle to upper end of the market, Luxottica was forced to step in to reverse the trend. Far From Last It is still named for footwear making, where it started in 1923, but these days U.S. Shoes retail chains are its most important business. WOMEN'S APPAREL RETAIL 1,300 stores, inclusing the Casual Corner, Petite Sophisticate, and Capezio, Pappagallo chains. OPTICAL RETAIL 540 stores in the Lenscrafters and Sight & Save chains. FOOTWEAR East Spirit, Cobbie, Selby, Joyce, Bandolino and other brands; wholesaling; 380 shoe stores.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: Luxottica to Acquire U.S. Shoe for $1.4 Billion. 
The Economy  The way was cleared for the first nationwide class action against the tobacco industry on behalf of the nearly 100 million Americans who smoke or have smoked. Federal Judge Okla B. Jones 2d ruled in Louisiana that the tobacco industry could be sued for punitive damages on accusations of addicting smokers.  [ Page 1. ] Reformulated gasoline is drawing consumer protests. The fuel is intended to cut smog and emissions of some carcinogens, but it costs more, and some drivers do not like its fumes.  [ 37. ] Kevin D. Mitnick, accused of a computer crime spree, waived his right to a bond hearing; he will continue to be held in jail.  [ 37. ] The United States trade deficit was the largest in seven years last year at more than $108 billion; deficits with Japan and China set records. The Clinton Administration conceded that the numbers looked disturbing, but said they reflected economic strength.  [ 37. ] Companies  NBC, in a stunning reversal of its campaign against the Fox television network, agreed to cease its effort to deny Fox broadcast licenses in seven cities. In exchange, NBC said it had reached a potentially lucrative agreement with Fox's chairman, Rupert Murdoch, to have two NBC-owned cable channels distributed on Mr. Murdoch's Star Television system in Asia.  [ 1. ] Motorola shares plunged $6.375, or 9.9 percent, in heavy trading after the company stunned Wall Street with the news that inventories of cellular phones were bulging.  [ 37. ] A Pulitzer prize-winning editorial page editor is leaving The Philadelphia Daily News to take a similar post at The Star-Ledger in Newark. The editor, Rich Aregood, cited business pressures to cut editorial resources as the reason for his departure.  [ 39. ] A $625 million transaction would create Italy's largest bank. Banca di Roma, Italy's second-largest bank, said it it would acquire control of Banca Nazionale dell'Agricoltura.  [ 39. ] Williams-Sonoma's stock tumbled $3 after analysts cut their earnings estimates for the company, whose holiday sales boom had made it the envy of the retail industry. The cost of handling the additional sales was $5 million more than expected.  [ 39. ] London Fog's owners have been meeting with creditors of the troubled coat manufacturer to hammer out a restructuring plan to keep the company from filing for bankruptcy protection.  [ 39. ] Markets  Stocks fell sharply on a "double-witching" day with traders' anxiety heightened by concern over Mexico's crisis. The Dow Jones industrial average was down 33.98 points to 3,953.54.  [ 37. ] Treasury prices showed little change after tracking the dollar through a holiday-shortened session.  [ 47. ] The dollar plunged against most major currencies for a second straight day, hit by the strong German mark and worries over Mexico's financial stability. The dollar fell a full pfennig to 1.4802 marks, the lowest point in almost two-and-a-half years.  [ 48. ] Gasoline prices rose, sending crude oil up on signs the Government will not allow states to stop selling clean-burning fuel.  [ 48. ] Your Money  Insurance policies for long-term health care are getting a second look by many consumers. One reason is proposed cuts in government spending for health care.  [ 35. ] Studying businesses, not markets, has paid off for Warren E. Buffett, the investing phenomenon who has said, "Lethargy bordering on sloth remains the cornerstone of our investment style." Francis Flaherty: Investing.  [ 35. ] The I.R.S. has a personality, and knowing it can help taxpayers avoid an audit, Martin Kaplan, a Manhattan certified public accountant, argues in a new book.  [ 36. ]We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 1995, on Page 1001037 of the National edition with the headline: BUSINESS DIGEST. 
It is the highest-profile -- one might even say most glamorous -- controversy in American education. For the past five years, teachers, business executives, politicians and editorial writers have been fiercely debating the merits of Channel One, the commercial-studded classroom news show founded by entrepreneur Christopher Whittle.Is it immoral to beam advertising to captive middle-school and high-school students? Or are two minutes of television ads a small price to pay for 10 minutes of news and public affairs programming? Is Channel One's format -- its MTV-esque graphics and fast pace -- anti-teacher, anti-literacy and ultimately anti-education? Or is it the best way to capture the attention of media-saturated teenagers?And what about Mr. Whittle, who was recently forced to sell most of his communications empire, including Channel One, for a fire-sale price? Can we entrust even part of our kids' education to a man who has apparently frittered away most of his working capital on private jets, white-elephant office buildings and custom-built sock drawers lined with hand-tooled leather?These are fine questions with which to engage adult minds. The view from educational Ground Zero, however, is quite a bit different.AdvertisementOr so it seems after a week spent watching Channel One inside a "typical" classroom. Pliny Haskell Junior High, in the blue-collar Los Angeles suburb of Cerritos, Calif., is home to more than 600 seventh and eighth graders and two dozen teachers.At Haskell -- a collection of one-story structures clustered near a freeway, in a neighborhood of strip malls and aged stucco-and-wood houses -- anything seen even vaguely as a resource is automatically thrown into the endless task of stimulating classroom discussion. And that includes Channel One.The deal offered to Haskell is the standard one: In exchange for incorporating Channel One into its curriculum, the school received a satellite dish, a videocassette recorder and a closed-circuit television system featuring 19-in. Magnavox sets in each classroom.The school has been hooked up to Channel One since tk, tk. Below, a week on the receiving end of this controversial connection. Monday, Nov. 14Let Your Smile Be Your Umbrella, reads the message of the day on the school signpost, as, shortly after 7:00 A. M., a line of mostly older-model cars begins dropping off students near the front gate.Fifteen minutes later, Paulette Fuller, Haskell's principal, is in her small office, discussing her school and her students."A lot of the problems of society find their way here," says Ms. Fuller, who has worked in the school district for 26 years. "Gangs, drugs in the kids' homes. Physical and emotional abuse. Parents working two or three jobs."The ethnic makeup of Haskell is roughly 35 percent white, 27 percent Hispanic, 25 percent Asian and 13 percent black. Many of the students are first-generation Americans. Recent budget cuts have meant an end to sports teams and all other afterschool programs. Parents are now being asked to purchase paper and other supplies.AdvertisementMs. Fuller says few of her students read a daily newspaper or watch nontabloid news shows on TV. "We like Channel One," she says, firmly. "The benefits greatly outweigh the disadvantages.""Get the lights, somebody," says John Viculin to his eighth-grade English class. It is 7:45 A. M., the start of the first period of the school day. The task for the week is to have students analyze a short story for plot, theme and point of view. But like most of the other first-period teachers at Haskell, Mr. Viculin -- who has been teaching since 1966 -- must first facilitate the daily Channel One session.His 23 students burrow into their sweatshirts and parkas in the still-chilly classroom.The TV set is mounted atop the front chalkboard. Seated at desks facing the center of the classroom, most of the eighth graders peer sideways and upwards in the semi-darkness. Several lay their heads down and nap; a few doodle or finish their homework. (At Haskell, watching Channel One is optional. Students are not tested on it. And two minutes, the amount of commercial time in each program, has been added to the school day.)Tape-delayed from its overnight satellite transmission, Channel One is broadcast schoolwide at the same time each day. It begins today, as it does every day, with a hand-drawn Channel One logo chosen from student submissions. Next, a few moments of rock music and music video-style graphics. Then a quotation flashes on the screen." 'Very big, China' -- Noel Coward," hangs above our heads momentarily.Dissolve to Lisa Ling and Rawley Valverde, two casually dressed Twentyish anchors, in the game room-like Channel One news set.Mr. Valverde, talking forcefully and seriously -- the Channel One anchor style -- reports briefly on President Clinton's trip to an Asian Pacific economic summit in Manila. Cut to: commercials for M&M candies and Nintendo video games. A few snickers from the classroom -- both commercials' a-bit-too-slick hipness is obvious. Then back to Ms. Ling, who introduces a mini-documentary she produced and taped in China last summer.The report explains how the Chinese government tries to control the flow of information about its country and the real state of its economy. And Ms. Ling describes how her government escort steers her into filming only at tourist sites and atypical "typical" homes and factories. Excitedly, she holds up the small video camera she used as she escaped from scrutiny and interviewed "real" Chinese citizens.There follow a few hesitant criticisms of government repression by unmonitored Chinese citizens, then some furtive shots of primitive-looking housing areas, farms and factories. The China report is to continue throughout the week.Advertisement"Okay!" says the grayhaired, energetic John Viculin, springing out of his seat as the picture fades and the lights go up. He pulls down a roll-up map of the world."Where did Channel One take us today?" he asks.While his classmates stretch and rub their eyes, a volunteer, Billy, walks to the front and points successfully to China."Right! Thank you! Now, why should all of us here in California care about what goes on in China?""Because they can blow us up with nuclear weapons?" says Ben, from his seat near the exit."Trade?" arises weakly from a confused babble at the other side of the classroom." 'Cause they don't have the rights we do?" offers one of the girls, Gaby. "Because they can't say nothing bad about the government?""Yes, but why should we care?" counters their teacher.A lively but somewhat scattered discussion ensues, touching on repression in Haiti, the virtue of obeying questionable government regulations and the true national origin of Toyotas.After a few more minutes, Mr. Viculin glances at the clock and takes a valiant stab at wrapping things up."All right. Let's think about one of the reasons people traveled across the Atlantic to start this country."Silence."Why do we study history?"Nothing."If people are afraid to speak out, what will eventually happen?"AdvertisementOne of the girls sitting near the front, Carolina, cocks an eyebrow skeptically. "Like, is there a specific answer to that question?" she says. Tuesday, Nov. 15The classroom is cold again; the whispered conversations as the lights go down are in both English and Spanish.The quote of the day is drawn from Will and Ariel Durant: "Only a fool would try to compress a hundred centuries in a hundred pages of hazardous conclusions. We proceed.""Huh?" says a voice in the darkness, answered by giggles.The commercials: pitches for Pepsi and pimple cream. Rawley Valverde is gone, replaced by an equally earnest young anchorman, Kris Osborne.The main feature of today's broadcast is another installment of Lisa Ling's China project. Wearing a Mao jacket and cap, Ms. Ling scrolls briskly through the modern history of China -- emphasizing its heritage of political repression, the legacy of the 1989 Tianamen Square rebellion, the absence of many of the freedoms Americans enjoy. Many of the points she makes echo the previous day's; a few more heads than before droop to the desktops.Mr. Viculin, who has been taking notes, kickstarts the discussion."What would you say is Lisa's view of China?""Negative," says Ben."Why?""Because they've got nuclear weapons, and they can blow us up."After the shouts and laughter die down, Mr. Viculin proposes that perhaps, just perhaps, in the point--of-view department, Lisa Ling's Chinese-American heritage makes her extra-sensitive to the differences between her own country and her ancestral one. It is a provocative concept, and for a few seconds the silence crackles. Wednesday, Nov. 16The quote is from Thomas Jefferson, the commercials for chewing gum, AT&T and a Space Invaders video game. The program includes segments on political repression in Indonesia, the progress of Hurricane Gordon, and the conservative push to legalize school prayer.AdvertisementIs it the observer's imagination, or are the students falling into a cathode-ray trance state more quickly as the week goes on? Today, there is no change of expression when the program shifts from news to commercials and back again."Okay. Form groups of three and brainstorm," says Mr. Viculin. "List the three stories on today's program and put a star next to the one you think is most important."After huddled discussions and some quickly-suppressed cross-classroom name-calling, the teams report in, voting almost unanimously for Gordon.Mr. Viculin smiles. "Well, I had the hurricane last, with school prayer first," he muses. "Maybe I was up in the clouds." Thursday, Nov. 17Even though John Viculin spreads his attentions equally, it's obvious that some of his students are less attuned to his efforts than others. Throughout the week, heads hit the desk even when the lights are up. Given on-the-spot writing assignments, some of his students in first period screw up their faces scornfully and produce barely a line, while their classmates scribble eagerly. During lulls, snatches of gang slang and attitude float by."Schoolboy," mutters a girl, with chilling disdain, when one of her male counterparts volunteers to answer a question.The TV quote today is by Pearl S. Buck: "Nothing and no one can destroy the Chinese people. They are relentless survivors. They are the oldest civilized people on earth." Magnavox: "We make technology people want."On her segment this morning, Lisa Ling prompts a laugh from the class by showing the patrons of a new Chinese disco dancing to fossilized rock music. Later. she smuggles a fellow exchange student into her Beijing hotel room for an unmonitored interview. As they start taping, the phone rings: It is Mr Young, her government minder, asking if he can come up for a visit her.AdvertisementCould her hotel room be bugged, she wonders? Hooked on drama, for just a second, we wonder also. Friday, Nov. 18After a quote that flies by too fast and a brief report on the school prayer controversy, Lisa Ling wraps things up with a skeptical visit to a suspiciously prosperous Chinese farm. Then, a stealthy meeting with some construction workers so poor that they have to sleep at the job site.The picture fades.'I'm going to try something,' says Mr. Viculin. "Put your heads down on the table. Close your eyes. Think about a blessing you can count on. Something in your life you value. Okay, head up. What did you think about?""This is about the prayer thing, right?" says Ben.'Hey! You can't say prayers in school!" says Carolina."It's okay if they don't announce it over the loudspeakers," says Ben, drawing his own legal conclusions.A lively discussion breaks out. Mr. Viculin beams."How do we know what's right or wrong?' says a boy, Jason, as both sides weigh in. "That's why people go to court."Carving out a few minutes of class time, Mr. Viculin turns the class over to the visiting reporter for his questions.What do the kids think of Channel One?"It's great.""It's b-o-o-o-oring."(Simultaneous shout): "The best time to do homework!"Do the commercials get you to want things you wouldn't otherwise?"Yes!""No!""Maybe!"How many think that Haskell Junior High should keep using Channel One?AdvertisementThe great majority thrust their hands upward. Only two students vote no. A few kids glance around at their classmates, surprised at the near unanimity, and giggle nervously. Their teacher calls for attention, and the class moves on.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 1995, on Page A4 of the National edition with the headline: The World According to Channel One. 
IT once seemed as though the rusty, brooding Haughwout Building, built in 1857 at Broome Street and Broadway, would remain unrestored forever. Now Staples, the office-supply store, has moved in, and the restoration of a dreary cast-iron pile that is one of New York's most outstanding landmarks has been set in motion.In 1856 Walter Langdon began putting up a large structure on his land at the northeast corner of Broome and Broadway. He must have been in touch with his future tenant, Eder V. Haughwout (it's usually pronounced HOWitt), because the resulting building was clearly custom-designed for what The New York Times described as "the greatest china and porcelain house in the city."Opened in March 1857, E. V. Haughwout & Company combined showrooms and manufacturing into a single structure: bronze, porcelains and silver on the first floor; china on the second; chandeliers on the third; and shop areas for silver plating, glass cutting, ivory turning, porcelain painting and other crafts on the fourth and fifth.Period illustrations researched by Margot Gayle, a cast-iron building expert, show a giant double stair (since demolished) rising at the east end of the building, and elaborate paneled ceiling moldings. They also show the flood of light that the trim, cast-iron facades could offer.AdvertisementHaughwout was a forerunner of the gigantic post-Civil War department stores. Its front was magnificent, a richly sculpted Venetian palace. But instead of limestone, marble or brownstone, the Haughwout store was made from cast iron from the foundry of Daniel D. Badger. The building is credited to the architect John P. Gaynor, but it is just as likely that the Badger company developed the scheme for the facade.Certainly Haughwout arranged for the elevator installed in April 1857 by Elisha H. Otis. According to Dennis A. Barrow, archivist for United Technologies/Otis Elevator, this was the first passenger elevator to have an automatic safety device; it led the way to the tall-building revolution a generation later. The appearance and position of this early elevator have never been established.Ms. Gayle wrote the introduction to the 1981 reprint by Dover Books of the 1865 "Badger's Illustrated Catalogue of Cast-Iron Architecture." According to her research, Mary Lincoln shopped at Haughwout's in 1861 and bought a set of mauve china for the White House.Haughwout retired in 1869 and in 1870 the company advertised the store for rent. In the 1880's E. H. Van Ingen's woolen business occupied the building, but around the 1890's it was converted to loft use.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perhaps that coincided with the 1892 installation of another elevator at the northern end of the Broadway facade. Although that car is often erroneously described as the original Otis elevator, the 1892 alteration application describes it as a totally new installation, designed by the architects Freeman and William Bloodgood and installed by the elevator manufacturer Alonzo B. See. Despite its later date, this is a beautiful work in its own right, with a paneled cab and elaborately cased shaft, no doubt one of the oldest operating elevators in the city -- a ride in it is as memorable as one in a hansom cab.By the 1960's, the SoHo area seemed like just another opportunity for slum clearance, which is why Robert Moses was so indignant at the opposition to his Lower Manhattan Expressway. A proposal that had been around for over a decade, the expressway would have cut a swath across Manhattan from river to river, destroying everything between Broome and Spring Streets -- including the Haughwout Building.BUT the Landmarks Preservation Commission, in one of its earliest actions, designated the Haughwout Building a landmark in 1965, over Mr. Moses's personal objections, and a coalition of community activists ultimately defeated the expressway proposal. At the time, the critic Peter Blake, writing in New York magazine, called the Haughwout Building the best cast-iron structure in the country.Now the Kaufman family, which has owned the building since the 1930's, is spending $175,000 to completely strip and repaint the building, as part of a renovation for Staples, a new ground-floor tenant. The architect Joseph Pell Lombardi is supervising the recasting of missing cast-iron elements, and the entire exterior will be painted in what Mr. Lombardi says are the original colors -- a soft cream color on the cast iron, and green on the windows, all to be finished in April.The stripping and priming work is under way, and already vanished under the restorationist's brush is the gloomy, black-painted cast-iron facade, redolent of the neglect and decay of the old SoHo, before the fancy galleries and co-op lofts. Pam Loree, a teacher who lives on Mercer Street, always thought it a sibling to Raymond Hood's elegant all-black American Radiator Building on West 40th Street. She decried the change, saying, "It just won't have any mystery anymore."But Ms. Gayle said, "You shouldn't want that building to stay dark -- you lose all sense of the detail."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 1995, on Page 9009005 of the National edition with the headline: Streetscapes/The Haughwout Building; Restoring a Richly Sculpted Venetian Palace. 
Surrounded by an inferno, overwhelmed by the smoke and the roar of collapsing buildings, Tatsuo Hamano, 17, decided that his only hope lay in running not away from the fire but into it.So he dashed into the flames, dumping his backpack when it began to blaze, and half a century later he is alive to tell the tale. "I was young and it was so chaotic, I didn't understand what was happening," Mr. Hamano said.Some 100,000 other residents did not survive the firebombing of Tokyo, and this week the city is remembering the trauma that began in the early morning hours of March 10, 1945, when Tokyo became a bonfire.The atomic bombing of Hiroshima on Aug. 6, 1945, has captured far more attention, but the napalm and jellied gasoline may have killed more people in Tokyo than the immediate effects of the blast did in Hiroshima. The United States Strategic Bombing Survey wrote at the time that "probably more persons lost their lives by fire at Tokyo in a six-hour period than at any time in the history of man."AdvertisementGen. Curtis LeMay, in defending the use of the atomic bombs, said, "We scorched and boiled and baked to death more people in Tokyo on that night of March 9-10 than went up in vapor at Hiroshima and Nagasaki combined."In fact, by current reckoning, General LeMay was wrong -- far more people died in the long run from radiation sickness and cancer because of the delayed effects of the atomic explosion -- but the immediate effect was about as cataclysmic.Yet Japan is marking the anniversary of the firebombing in a subdued way, befitting its tangle of feelings about the war. While three times as many people died in Tokyo as in the firebombing of Dresden, Germany, in February 1945, there seems to be less introspection here: less anger at the bombers, as well as less self-reproach for starting the war. The dominant emotion today regarding the firebombing of Tokyo perhaps is stoicism intertwined with antipathy for war in general."The firebombing probably led to an earlier end of the war," Katsumoto Saotome, a writer and antiwar campaigner who has devoted much of his life to documenting the bombing, mused as he sat cross-legged on a tatami mat in his study. "But I think killing noncombatants was an unforgivable violation of human morality."After a moment's silence, Mr. Saotome added hastily, "But in fact it was Japan that was the first to kill noncombatants, when it bombed cities like Chongqing in China."The firebombing of Tokyo was in some sense the top step in a spiral staircase in the capacity of conventional arms and the willingness to use them. When German planes bombed Guernica in 1937 in the Spanish Civil War, there was outrage at the killing of women and children, but by 1945 few Americans had compunctions about sending 100,000 Japanese civilians to their death.  Time magazine wrote that the firebombing was "a dream come true."Britons and Americans often feel a measure of guilt about the firebombing of Dresden, in which at least 35,000 Germans died, but there is much less remorse about the far greater casualties in Tokyo.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There is also a sense, evident as well in arguments of those who justify the atomic bombings, that the conflagration shortened the war and saved American forces from having to invade the main islands of Japan. Though the issue is hotly debated, such an invasion might have cost far more lives, Japanese and American, than any firebombing.Earl Johnson, then a 27-year-old operations officer, was aboard one of the B-29 bombers that bombed Tokyo 50 years ago, and after a talk in Tokyo today he answered a question about the morality of the mission.Advertisement"No war is fun," said Mr. Johnson, who eventually rose to major general. "People get hurt, civilians get hurt, children get hurt. The United States was in this war to win it, and if that's what it took to win, that's what should have been done.""If you want to say it was wrong, it was inhumane," Mr. Johnson added, "well, war is not a humane activity, and neither was Pearl Harbor a humane activity."Even today, there is tremendous uncertainty about the toll of the firebombing, whose anniversary is Friday -- or Thursday in the United States, because of the time difference. Estimates of the death toll range from about 83,000 to nearly 200,000, with most coming in at about 100,000.The Japanese education system is often accused of playing down atrocities by the Japanese Army, but school textbooks also pay scant attention to the Tokyo firebombing. The elementary school history textbook used in Japanese schools merely says in a phrase that air raids "largely destroyed" Tokyo, while the junior high textbook devotes precisely one sentence to the destruction of Tokyo.March 10 is now Peace Day in Tokyo, and the Tokyo Metropolitan Edo-Tokyo Museum is commemorating the 50th anniversary with a major exhibit. About 1,800 people a day, a modest flow, file past the detritus of the firebombing: coins melted in the heat, bomb casings, a lean-to shelter for the homeless and photos of rubble where once a city had stood.The museum provides some context to clarify that the United States did not drop firebombs out of sheer meanness. The first half of the exhibit portrays the growing militarism of the 1930's and 40's, and a video clip shows Japanese bombers attacking the central Chinese city of Chongqing in the war. But the focus remains on Tokyo's suffering."There's not much about politics here," said Toshihiro Itaya, the museum curator. "The exhibit is about the lives of people during war, and we didn't take up the issue of war responsibility."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 1995, on Page A00004 of the National edition with the headline: Tokyo Journal; Stoically, Japan Looks Back on the Flames of War. 
MAKE ME WORK By Ralph Lombreglia. Penguin, $9.95. Working is exactly what the protagonists of these stories don't like to do. Usually male, they are emotional refugees from the 1960's, longing for an innocence they never had. The book's nine tales, often delving into these men's relationships with women, "are both funny and profound," Louis B. Jones said here last year.A FEAST OF WORDS: The Triumph of Edith Wharton By Cynthia Griffin Wolff. Merloyd Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $15. Originally published in 1977, this biography has been expanded and revised to incorporate new material that has since become available, including letters written by Edith Wharton to her lover, Morton Fullerton. Intended to be the "private story" of Wharton's life, it shows how writing helped free her from the conventions that confined women of her era -- and that she often criticized in her work. Our reviewer, Maureen Howard, found the book "immensely satisfying." She added, "It is impossible to single out one reading of a text in this gifted work as the most distinguished." OLD NEW YORK: Four Novellas (Scribner Paperback, $11) is a Wharton collection just restored to print. Set in the mid-1800's, it includes "The Old Maid," which concerns the consequences of a young woman's decision to allow the illegitimate child she bore in secrecy to be adopted by her best friend. This story "is the finest contribution to our fiction made by any author in many years," Lloyd Morris said in The New York Times in 1924. The scene shifts in WHARTON'S NEW ENGLAND: Seven Stories and "Ethan Frome," edited by Barbara A. White (Hardscrabble Classics/University Press of New England, $14.95), a compilation of pieces about Wharton's other home. The emotions she evokes are often as cold as the winters in Starkfield and Hillbridge, two of her fictional Massachusetts locales.  THE HEART THAT BLEEDS: Latin America Now By Alma Guillermoprieto. Vintage, $13. These 13 essays explore the class inequalities and economic instability that have made Latin America's democracies tenuous -- and the entire region vulnerable to both drug lords and dictators. Last year our reviewer, Michael Reid, called the author's reporting "scrupulous and often courageous." IN THE CITIES AND JUNGLES OF BRAZIL, by Paul Rambali (Owl/Holt, $12.95), focuses on Latin America's largest nation, from its impoverished street children to its warring politicians. Reading the book "seems proof that the world is still big enough to deliver surprises," Rand Richards Cooper said here last year.  THE RIFLES. Volume 6 of "Seven Dreams: A Book of North American Landscapes" By William T. Vollmann. Penguin, $11.95. The latest in the author's series of novels about North American history focuses on the plight of the Inuit. It draws parallels between the lives of two men: Adm. Sir John Franklin, who died trying to find the Northwest Passage in the 1840's, and a 31-year-old contemporary novelist who resembles Mr. Vollmann. Last year our reviewer, James McManus, said that we "see North America with more complex empathy for those peoples that have been, for the most part, supplanted."  SIGNS OF LIFE: The Language and Meanings of DNA By Robert Pollack. Houghton Mifflin, $10.95. A professor of biology explains the inner workings of the cell, and how all human traits are transmitted. DNA, he says, is like an encyclopedia, in which genes are the sentences and their chemical bases the alphabet. The author "is what keeps science writers awake nights: a scientist who really writes," Ann Finkbeiner said here last year. A tiny but powerful enemy of human DNA is the focus of THE INVISIBLE INVADERS: Viruses and the Scientists Who Pursue Them, by Peter Radetsky (Back Bay/Little, Brown, $13.95). The author deals with the discovery of many of these infectious agents, from the rabies virus to H.I.V. In 1991 our reviewer, Harold S. Ginsberg, said he "has managed to provide engrossing reading for nonscientists and scientists alike."  I KILLED HEMINGWAY By William McCranor Henderson. Picador USA, $12. A down-and-out writer and erstwhile literary scholar is sent by his publisher to meet an old man who claims that he killed Ernest Hemingway and made it look like suicide. The relationships between master and apprentice, father and son, and truth and fiction are all scrutinized in this story, which is "complex, amusing and palpably symbolic," Robert Grudin said here in 1993.  DAUGHTER OF SHANGHAI By Tsai Chin. St. Martin's, $10.95. A Chinese actress whose many stage and film roles have included Suzie Wong in the 1950's and 60's and Auntie Lindo in "The Joy Luck Club" in 1993 recounts her life. She emphasizes the betrayal and murder of her parents during the Cultural Revolution and what she feels is her own betrayal of her heritage early in her career. In 1990 our reviewer, Beth Duff Sanders, called this a "captivating account," in which the author "has skillfully interwoven . . . glamour and despair." TRACING IT HOME: A Chinese Family's Journey From Shanghai, by Lynn Pan (Kodansha, $14), combines biography and history, as a journalist relates her parents' and grandparents' experiences in China and the loss of the family fortune to the Communists. Her work is "living, unpretentious and moving," one critic said in 1993.  THE CIRCUS OF THE EARTH AND THE AIR By Brooke Stevens. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $12. This first novel compares life to a circus: both tend to include tightropes and disappearing acts. The plot revolves around a man looking for his wife, who volunteered for a circus performance and has literally vanished. Last year our reviewer, William Ferguson, said it "reads like a love letter to that most exotic of lives."  LAUREL GRAEBERWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this review appears in print on April 9, 1995, on Page 7007032 of the National edition with the headline: New & Noteworthy Paperbacks.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

MAKE ME WORK By Ralph Lombreglia. Penguin, $9.95. Working is exactly what the protagonists of these stories don't like to do. Usually male, they are emotional refugees from the 1960's, longing for an innocence they never had. The book's nine tales, often delving into these men's relationships with women, "are both funny and profound," Louis B. Jones said here last year.A FEAST OF WORDS: The Triumph of Edith Wharton By Cynthia Griffin Wolff. Merloyd Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $15. Originally published in 1977, this biography has been expanded and revised to incorporate new material that has since become available, including letters written by Edith Wharton to her lover, Morton Fullerton. Intended to be the "private story" of Wharton's life, it shows how writing helped free her from the conventions that confined women of her era -- and that she often criticized in her work. Our reviewer, Maureen Howard, found the book "immensely satisfying." She added, "It is impossible to single out one reading of a text in this gifted work as the most distinguished." OLD NEW YORK: Four Novellas (Scribner Paperback, $11) is a Wharton collection just restored to print. Set in the mid-1800's, it includes "The Old Maid," which concerns the consequences of a young woman's decision to allow the illegitimate child she bore in secrecy to be adopted by her best friend. This story "is the finest contribution to our fiction made by any author in many years," Lloyd Morris said in The New York Times in 1924. The scene shifts in WHARTON'S NEW ENGLAND: Seven Stories and "Ethan Frome," edited by Barbara A. White (Hardscrabble Classics/University Press of New England, $14.95), a compilation of pieces about Wharton's other home. The emotions she evokes are often as cold as the winters in Starkfield and Hillbridge, two of her fictional Massachusetts locales.  THE HEART THAT BLEEDS: Latin America Now By Alma Guillermoprieto. Vintage, $13. These 13 essays explore the class inequalities and economic instability that have made Latin America's democracies tenuous -- and the entire region vulnerable to both drug lords and dictators. Last year our reviewer, Michael Reid, called the author's reporting "scrupulous and often courageous." IN THE CITIES AND JUNGLES OF BRAZIL, by Paul Rambali (Owl/Holt, $12.95), focuses on Latin America's largest nation, from its impoverished street children to its warring politicians. Reading the book "seems proof that the world is still big enough to deliver surprises," Rand Richards Cooper said here last year.  THE RIFLES. Volume 6 of "Seven Dreams: A Book of North American Landscapes" By William T. Vollmann. Penguin, $11.95. The latest in the author's series of novels about North American history focuses on the plight of the Inuit. It draws parallels between the lives of two men: Adm. Sir John Franklin, who died trying to find the Northwest Passage in the 1840's, and a 31-year-old contemporary novelist who resembles Mr. Vollmann. Last year our reviewer, James McManus, said that we "see North America with more complex empathy for those peoples that have been, for the most part, supplanted."  SIGNS OF LIFE: The Language and Meanings of DNA By Robert Pollack. Houghton Mifflin, $10.95. A professor of biology explains the inner workings of the cell, and how all human traits are transmitted. DNA, he says, is like an encyclopedia, in which genes are the sentences and their chemical bases the alphabet. The author "is what keeps science writers awake nights: a scientist who really writes," Ann Finkbeiner said here last year. A tiny but powerful enemy of human DNA is the focus of THE INVISIBLE INVADERS: Viruses and the Scientists Who Pursue Them, by Peter Radetsky (Back Bay/Little, Brown, $13.95). The author deals with the discovery of many of these infectious agents, from the rabies virus to H.I.V. In 1991 our reviewer, Harold S. Ginsberg, said he "has managed to provide engrossing reading for nonscientists and scientists alike."  I KILLED HEMINGWAY By William McCranor Henderson. Picador USA, $12. A down-and-out writer and erstwhile literary scholar is sent by his publisher to meet an old man who claims that he killed Ernest Hemingway and made it look like suicide. The relationships between master and apprentice, father and son, and truth and fiction are all scrutinized in this story, which is "complex, amusing and palpably symbolic," Robert Grudin said here in 1993.  DAUGHTER OF SHANGHAI By Tsai Chin. St. Martin's, $10.95. A Chinese actress whose many stage and film roles have included Suzie Wong in the 1950's and 60's and Auntie Lindo in "The Joy Luck Club" in 1993 recounts her life. She emphasizes the betrayal and murder of her parents during the Cultural Revolution and what she feels is her own betrayal of her heritage early in her career. In 1990 our reviewer, Beth Duff Sanders, called this a "captivating account," in which the author "has skillfully interwoven . . . glamour and despair." TRACING IT HOME: A Chinese Family's Journey From Shanghai, by Lynn Pan (Kodansha, $14), combines biography and history, as a journalist relates her parents' and grandparents' experiences in China and the loss of the family fortune to the Communists. Her work is "living, unpretentious and moving," one critic said in 1993.  THE CIRCUS OF THE EARTH AND THE AIR By Brooke Stevens. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $12. This first novel compares life to a circus: both tend to include tightropes and disappearing acts. The plot revolves around a man looking for his wife, who volunteered for a circus performance and has literally vanished. Last year our reviewer, William Ferguson, said it "reads like a love letter to that most exotic of lives."  LAUREL GRAEBERWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this review appears in print on April 9, 1995, on Page 7007032 of the National edition with the headline: New & Noteworthy Paperbacks.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

CompaniesTime Warner agreed to acquire Cablevision Industries in a stock deal valued at $2.2 billion. The move, which follows a $2.3 billion acquisition two weeks ago, means the company has caught up to the giant in cable systems, Tele-Communications.  [ D1. ]A former American Honda executive pleaded guilty to scheming with other company officials to accept bribes of up to $1 million and gifts in exchange for granting franchises.  [ D1. ]Silicon Graphics plans to acquire two producers of three-dimensional animation software, Alias Research and Wavefront Technologies, in a stock deal worth about $500 million.  [ D4. ]Twentieth Century and Burlington Northern will merge, creating the nation's fifth-biggest no-load mutual fund company.  [ D4. ]AdvertisementThe merger of Santa Fe Pacific and Burlington Northern was approved by the shareholders of the two companies.  [ D4. ]Pepsico said earnings rose 16 percent, but reported disappointing profit for its Pizza Hut, Taco Bell and KFC chains.  [ D4. ]Paine Webber is negotiating with the S.E.C. to settle possible charges that some brokers concealed risks of limited partnerships they sold, people familiar with the talks said.  [ D5. ]Sears, Roebuck's quarterly earnings surged 25.7 percent.  [ D5. ] InternationalThe United States plans to expand subsidized wheat sales to China even as it imposes sanctions on Chinese goods. The move, which the Administration said was made to protect American farmers from European competition, is bound to raise questions by those who regard trade policy as inconsistent.  [ D1. ]Mexico successfully sold its first Treasury bonds since an international rescue package was announced last week.  [ D1. ] Business TechnologyThe M-bone is turning the Internet into a virtual broadcasting medium. The M-bone, which functions as a network within the Internet's global web of computer networks, may emerge as a full-fledged information superhighway.  [ D1. ]Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The first computer monitor with a screen that has the same proportions as a movie screen has been introduced by Sony.  [ D7. ] The EconomyUnited States productivity grew in 1994 for the fifth consecutive year. In a separate report, consumer credit rose at an annual rate of 9.8 percent in December, the slowest rate in five months.  [ D2 ] .The Pentagon awarded nearly $100 million to 45 military contractors to maintain production lines for the B-2 bomber.  [ D2. ]AdvertisementOrange County offered to give investors in the California county's investment pool 77 percent of their money back.  [ D2. ] MarketsTreasury prices rose as the Government began a refinancing with the sale of $17 billion in new three-year notes.  [ D6. ]Stocks were little changed. The S.& P. 500 fell 0.33 point.  [ D8. ]The dollar gained against most currencies.  [ D17. ]Copper prices tumbled on expectations of slower demand. Natural gas and cotton prices also fell sharply.  [ D17. ] Today's ColumnsShares of America West have languished, even though the company has a strong balance sheet and low costs. The carrier's emergence from bankruptcy protection is still fresh in the minds of analysts, who are also uncomfortable with the intentions of some of the company's investors. Market Place.  [ D8. ]The selling of a President, three decades later, is the goal of a new campaign promoting visits to the New Museum at the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston. Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D18. ]We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 1995, on Page D00001 of the National edition with the headline: BUSINESS DIGEST. 
THE greatest difference between us and the rest of the animal kingdom, declared Clairee Belcher, the cheeky elder stateswoman in "Steel Magnolias," is "our ability to accessorize." Ah, but Ms. Belcher might well have noted another outstanding trait specific to our species: breasts. We are the only mammal whose mammaries stay permanently enlarged whether or not the glands are dispensing milk.Breasts. Accessories. Breasts as accessories. Put them on, take them off, push them up, bind them tight. The right kind of bra, and voila, you have your own continental shelf cantilevered right below your collarbone, complete with the deepest, most delicious San Andreas fault line running down the middle.This year, breasts are to be worn very large, very round and very unused -- like the naked ones that Claudia Schiffer, the most ubiquitous model of the '90's, displays on the back cover of this week's New Yorker, the nipples kittenishly concealed by her fingers, the prominent hemispheres pushed up, up toward her prominent cheekbones. Or breasts can look like the ones that were displayed at the Academy Awards -- those famous fronts of Jamie Lee Curtis, Susan Sarandon and Sarah Jessica Parker.Now You See Them . . .Not very long ago, the waif was in and breasts were passe. And before that, very big breasts were in; concerns about breasts implants had not yet surfaced, and plastic surgeons were slapping them in women's chests at the rate of tens of thousands a year. For a long time before that, breasts were not really a fashion issue at all. Models didn't have breasts. They were supposed to be willowy and delicate, to show off the flow of the clothes. Now, nearly all models somehow manage to defy physiology and have plump breasts on slender bodies, the contrast between bust and waist made more extreme through the use of corsettes, bustiers, and the Wonderbra and its many knockoffs (or knock-ons).Advertisement"The breasts are accentuated and turned into giant signs, and the rest of body is attenuated," said Mary G. Winkler, an assistant professor at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, and the co-editor with Letha B. Cole of "The Good Body." "The ideal body is now a boy's body with breasts."Short though the cycle of acceptable breast sizes has become, the use of breasts as a fashion statement is hardly new. Anne Hollander, the author of "Sex & Suits" and "Seeing Through Clothes," believes that the display of the breast marks the beginning of the modern era of women's fashion. "Back in the 14th century, the first thing women did to get out of the long draped shapes was to cut down the neckline and tighten the bodice, revealing the slopes of the breast," she said. "Men led the way in fashionable change by showing off the leg, but women went for the breasts as the thrilling, attractive objects" most worthy of exhibition.A pronounced bosom did not stay stylish. Toward the end of the 16th century, said Ms. Hollander, a thick waist and tiny breasts were deemed ideal, and in the 1920's flappers bound their busts into androgynous billboards of modernity and liberation. But those were exceptions. Over the last 500 years, it has been more common for women's breasts to be worshiped."The breasts, like the eyes, come in pairs," said Ms. Hollander. "They're one of the pairs of natural jewels that women have. Babies love them, men love them, women love them, everybody loves them." Eighteenth-century scholars wrote treatises describing the ideal shape of the breast -- "hemispherical" rather than bowl-shaped, conical or elongated -- and their ideal color -- "snowy white," not such a surprising choice given the feelings of universal superiority that Europeans cultivated.In Your Evolutionary Dreams . . ."When female slaves were portrayed in art sympathetically, they were shown as having the classic spherical breasts," said Londa Schiebinger, a history professor at Pennsylvania State University and the author of "Nature's Body." "When they were portrayed unsympathetically, they were shown with long, hanging, animal-like breasts."Some biologists have argued that a preference for big, spherical breasts is innate, an evolutionary taste instilled and accentuated over generations of sexual selection. The zoologist Desmond Morris has difficulty writing a book without repeating his theory, first proposed 30 years ago in "The Naked Ape," that breasts evolved to mimic the shape of the buttocks and so redirect a man's attention from the back of a woman to her front, the better to encourage face-to-face intercourse and thus to promote female orgasm and the famed pair bond. However, the theory has no evidence to back it up, and other primates like pygmy chimpanzees and orangutans manage to have frontal intercourse without the visual aid of a counterfeit rear.Whatever the biological reason for women's uniquely enlarged breasts, an obsession with them is not universal. "In China, it's very clear that the breast is much less sexualized than it is in American culture," said Emily Martin, an anthropologist at Johns Hopkins University. "It's neither hidden nor revealed in any particularly striking way by either dress or undergarments. Women sit in the sun with naked breasts and it's completely unerotic."Why, then, America's particular conviction that you can't be too rich or too buxom? Women's actual breasts have not gotten bigger: the average breast size is 36B and has been for half a century or more. Could it be the natural outgrowth of our nation's famed puritanical heritage and sexual prudery, which has been aggravated by the era of AIDS? Nicolino, a conceptual artist who has explored America's breast obsession by building two miles of sand-castle breasts on Stinson Beach, Calif., said that the preferred size of breasts balloons ever more aggressively when our sexuality is pinched. "When we put a taboo on anything as essential as the human form, that taboo generates a black market," he said. "Breasts come back to us exaggerated in importance and size." Nicolino's next project, scheduled for the spring of 1996, is to snap together 10,000 donated bras and fly them over the Grand Canyon. "We'll have a chain of these iconic objects," he said, "and we'll span the greatest cleavage on the planet."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 1995, on Page 4004006 of the National edition with the headline: Ideas & Trends; Put On Your Best Chest -- It's Time To Preen. 
Four of the world's main nuclear countries are locked in a dispute as they negotiate a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing: they all want to retain the right to conduct tiny blasts but disagree over the size that should be permitted.The conflict stems from the little-known fact that arms designers can set off nuclear explosions that at their smallest are the equivalent of only a few pounds of TNT. The blasts are useful in checking design calculations and the reliability of existing weapons.The treaty, being negotiated in Geneva, is intended to increase international stability by ending the evolution of the world's most deadly munitions and heading off new arms races. The starting point for such talks might seem to be allowing no blasts whatsoever. After all, the ban by definition is to be comprehensive.Yet Russia, France, Britain and the United States all want to retain the right to conduct the small blasts.AdvertisementThe Clinton Administration has taken the most restrictive stance in the negotiations -- that blasts should have a force no greater than four pounds of TNT. The others want more powerful blasts, ranging up to 200 tons of TNT or higher.The American position is under fire and might change, arms experts say. The Pentagon wants higher levels while some arms-control experts are pushing for zero. As the dispute heat ups, the issues are starting to come into public view."Changing the position is such a major decision that I don't see it happening without a debate," said Dr. Frank von Hippel, a physicist who recently left the White House to return to science policy studies at Princeton University.Private experts worry that slowness in negotiating a comprehensive test ban might undermine support for an extension of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, which calls on nations to curb the spread of nuclear arms. Debate on its renewal is to open on April 17 at the United Nations. Nations without nuclear weapons seem fairly open to the possibility of nuclear testing at low explosive yields, but that might change.On Monday, the Natural Resources Defense Council, an arms-control group based in Washington that advocates a ban on even the smallest tests, released a report warning that small blasts would open a Pandora's box, encouraging countries that have undeclared nuclear weapons and aspiring nuclear states to do such testing and perhaps providing camouflage for the conduct of more powerful explosions.The upshot, the report said, could be a virtual license to design and test a variety of modern nuclear arms, undermining the central purpose of the comprehensive test ban.The Pentagon's position is that small blasts will mainly aid safety checks of the nation's nuclear arsenal while doing little to promote the development of big nuclear arms.The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty has been a goal of antinuclear activists ever since President Eisenhower first proposed one in 1957. It has also been firmly opposed by American laboratories that design nuclear arms. During the cold war, they checked a new weapon design by conducting a half dozen or so large test explosions under a desolate patch of Nevada desert.AdvertisementThe United States has observed a moratorium on nuclear blasts since 1992, and the Clinton Administration seems eager to sign a test-ban treaty if the details can be worked out.The crux of the problem with very small tests is that they, like the big desert-shaking ones, can have two roles -- helping check the reliability of old weapons and, to some extent, helping to develop new ones.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The smallest tests are known as hydronuclear, since the metallic bomb parts that are explosively thrown together liquefy while releasing small amounts of nuclear energy. The tests are done by replacing part of the nuclear material of a bomb with isotopes that do not undergo a chain reaction, said Dr. Thomas B. Cochran, an author of the new report.With a blast of four pounds, he said, arms designers could investigate some safety issues and make some sketchy nuclear measurements that might raise the odds of successfully developing a full-strength bomb, but in no way prove its workability.The nation's weapons labs have backed hydronuclear tests as a way to check on the inevitable decay of the nation's shrinking nuclear arsenal during a test ban. The United States is currently said to be conducting no hydronuclear tests.A Federal advisory panel known as Jason, made up of top American scientists, last November dismissed the small tests as having little technical merit compared with the possible damage to the nation's efforts to curb the spread of the bomb.The Pentagon has argued otherwise, lately with growing force and effectiveness. In its report, the Natural Resources Defense Council said the White House had told the Pentagon that the issue of the American four-pound stance could be reopened once work ended on extending the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.In exchange, the report said, the Pentagon agreed to the dropping of an American position in test-ban negotiations that would have allowed an easy way of abandoning the treaty after 10 years. In January the White House announced the closing of the loophole with some fanfare.Britain wants tests with explosive yields of up to a few hundred pounds, according to the resources defense council report. These levels would ease the kind of measurements that can be done at the American four-pound level.AdvertisementRussia wants tests up to tens of tons, which the report says would aid the design of advanced atom bombs. France wants tests up to 200 tons, which the report says could aid the study of thermonuclear reactions key to dramatically boosting the power of nuclear arms.China's position is said to depend on whether the treaty contains a blast threshold at all. If it does, China is said to favor relatively large yields to compensate for its perceived lack of technical expertise.Part of the impasse stems from a cycle of apprehensions, experts say. The major nuclear powers fear that the United States with its great technical strengths will derive more information from small blasts than they will, which is one reason they oppose the four-pound limit. In turn, the United States fears higher yields will aid nations trying to develop nuclear arms for the first time.Dr. von Hippel of Princeton University said one way out of the impasse might be pushing for a zero yield, since that would ease some apprehensions among the major nuclear-weapon states."We have to go up or down if we're going to get some kind of agreement," he said. "It might be easier to go to zero than stick it out at four pounds. But it won't be very easy, because people have dug in their heels."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 1995, on Page A00006 of the National edition with the headline: Atom Powers Want to Test Despite Treaty. 
CHINESE NEW YEAR LION DANCES, starting tomorrow, with the Fu-Jow Pai Martial Arts troupe at 1 P.M. in front of the China Institute, 125 East 65th Street, Manhattan. Free. Featuring a Beijing opera demonstration and a face painting drop-in workshop at 2 P.M. Information: (212) 744-8181. Other lion dances are to be held on Tuesday, from noon to 6 P.M., in Chinatown, starting at 19 and 22 Mott Street; on Feb. 4 in Flushing, Queens, starting at 11 A.M., at 39-01 Main Street, and at 11 A.M., at Northern Boulevard and Main Street; on Feb. 5, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., at various locations throughout Chinatown, and on Feb. 5, in Borough Park, Brooklyn, starting at noon, at Eighth Avenue and 52d Street. Information: (212) 334-0726 or 334-0711. "WALT DISNEY'S WORLD ON ICE," a $6 million extravaganza of "Beauty and the Beast" on ice, with the Howard Ashman and Alan Menken score and Russian skaters. Today through Sunday at the Brendan Byrne Arena, Route 3, East Rutherford, N.J.; Jan. 31 to Feb. 5 at Nassau Coliseum, 1255 Hempstead Turnpike, Uniondale, L.I., and Feb. 17 to 26 at Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street. Various schedules. Tickets: At Byrne and Nassau, $12.50 to $32.50; at Radio City, $17.50 to $35. Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171, (201) 507-8900, (516) 888-9000 or (914) 454-3388."LET THE GARDENS LIVE: WINTER CANDLE-LANTERN PAGEANT," a campaign to save 50 Manhattan community gardens in the East Village and on the Lower East Side, with a pageant of glowing lanterns, giant puppets, dancers, a band and a bell chorus. Starting at 638 East Sixth Street, near Tompkins Square Park, and continuing to the Sixth Street and Avenue B Garden for a winter carnival of Butoh dancing, opera singing, drama, a bonfire and hot cider and roasted apples. Tomorrow at 6 P.M. (for volunteer participants) or 7 P.M. (for spectators). Free. Information: (212) 727-8283.  "PLANTS OF THE DESERT," a nature-arts workshop in which children 3 and older and a parent can forget about winter by sketching and painting cactuses in a greenhouse. At Wave Hill, West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx. Tomorrow and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M. (Drop-ins permitted) Admission waived this month and next; suggested workshop contribution: $4 a family. Information: (718) 549-3200. RIVERSIDE CHURCH CHILDREN'S CONCERT SERIES, the program's second year is to begin tomorrow with Hamiet Bluiett, a saxophonist playing jazz. Kim Laskowski and the Continental Quintet will perform on Feb. 25 and a performance of dance, poetry and piano music called "The Kangaroo Garden" is to take place on March 11. Tomorrow and March 11, concerts are at 1 P.M.; on Feb. 25, at 12:30 P.M. For children 4 and up with adults. Suggested fee: $5 for adults, $2 for children. The church entrance is on Claremont Avenue at 121st Street, Morningside Heights. Information: (212) 870-6722.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this schedule appears in print on January 27, 1995, on Page C00016 of the National edition with the headline: Keep in Mind. 
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last. The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth. Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession. Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.China, a favored destination for foreign investment, slowed down its unrelenting growth last year to 11 percent, a still-formidable rate that strained the capacity of aging industries and power grids. Japan, no longer the growth model for Asia, tried to climb out of its prolonged slump, with growth of barely 1 percent in 1994.Political developments rattled countries like Mexico, where the peso plummeted after being freed to float against the dollar. Eastern Europe continued to slough off old Communist habits. But in Russia, the best economic news may have been that growth dropped off only 8 percent in 1994, compared with double-digit declines in the previous two years.AdvertisementTrade liberalization became an international byword, notably with the North American Free Trade Association, now a year old. But frontier barriers were also lowered within Europe and Latin America, even as Washington's trade frictions with Japan and China festered. The European Union expanded to 15 countries. And the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade transformed itself into a sleeker new World Trade Organization.Russia finds itself at the end of another year in a now-familiar position, both politically and economically: the worst has not happened, but there is plenty of disappointment to go around.Since using tanks to win his confrontation with the old Parliament, President Boris N. Yeltsin has moved sharply toward the nationalist middle. But he continues to swear allegiance to the idea of a low-inflation market reform, as does his Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin.Still, the number of Western-oriented reformers in the Cabinet has become parlously small, and even the most powerful of them, Anatoly B. Chubais, a First Deputy Prime Minister, has a larger constituency among Western bankers and governments than he has domestically.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the Government has drafted an extremely tight budget for 1995, promising to take no more credits from the Central Bank to finance the deficit and projecting monthly inflation of 2 percent by the end of 1995, no one believes the Parliament will approve it. And no one can be sure that the Government will not once again, as it did last year, simply decide to ignore its own budget and start printing rubles in large numbers.After Russia's most serious effort so far at economic stabilization, which held monthly inflation down to 4.6 percent in August, the cost of breaking the budget during the summer became apparent; monthly inflation surged to 15 percent in the last quarter of the year -- roughly where it was in December 1993.The International Monetary Fund is contemplating providing as much as $12 billion in transitional and regular lending to Russia in 1995 -- in return for real stabilization. But the fund is having doubts about the ability of the Government to keep its promises as Russia's politics intensify. All officials are looking ahead to parliamentary elections in December 1995 and presidential ones the next June.Still, inflation-adjusted incomes are going up, an average of 5 percent a month, even though they still represent only 82 percent of the last decent Soviet year, in 1990. Real wages are up more than 20 percent from the beginning of price liberalization in June 1992, and so is real consumption, with a wide choice of goods. The average industrial wage is more than $100 a month, despite the ruble's drop in value against the dollar.Pensioners are being hurt less than the unemployed, whose number is rising gradually, or the larger numbers paid minimum salaries by factories that cannot pay them properly but do not want to discharge them. As many as nine million people, or about 11 percent of the work force, are thought to be unemployed or sharply underemployed, although the official jobless register is about a quarter of that figure.Privatization is continuing on a cash basis and Western investors are beginning to figure out a path through the twisted thicket of Russian regulations, duties and manifold taxes, which, if followed scrupulously, would make it impossible for anyone to do any business.Advertisement"No one tries to slam their brakes on a slippery road," said one senior American official optimistically, trying to explain why Russia's on-again, off-again overhaul was not so bad. "You've got to pump the brakes." STEVEN ERLANGERWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 1995, on Page C00010 of the National edition with the headline: OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Russia Faces Plenty Of Disappointment. 
Almost everything Americans buy is now made outside America. You knew that long ago. I knew it too, but I hadn't really believed it until various women took me shopping in December.This meant killing time in women's wear divisions of assorted marts. What a learning experience these marts afforded. I'd heard that marts were taking over the world, but I had never thought enough about marts to ask, "What is a mart anyhow?"Nothing beats on-site inspection. As a result I now know that a mart is a store selling goods made almost exclusively in Asia and Central America.During the hours women friends were shopping for perfection in female apparel I studied labels on women's clothing. Almost all of it, I was stupidly shocked to note, was made in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, the Philippines, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Honduras, Brazil and Mexico.AdvertisementOne mart was selling women's wear "Made in the United Arab Emirates." Something of a shock, that one. The idea of poor Arab women toiling for sweat-tent wages to produce clothes for American women clashed with my most ignorant and firmly held stereotypes of life in the Arab emirates.Camel saddles, yes, yes. Had I wandered into that great mart's Gifts for the Guy Who's Got It All department and noticed a camel saddle for sale, I would probably have thought, "I'll bet that's made in the United Arab Emirates." But women's wear?I, with my Western male white despicable arrogance, have ranted for years about American schoolchildren being dumb about geography. Yet all that time I'd been the true geography ignoramus, a dolt who didn't even know that the United Arab Emirates produced women's ready-to-wear.Even more astounding was a label saying "Made in the Northern Mariana Islands," because that's where the B-29's that carried the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs were based in 1945.How stiff and stuffy a mind can become with a little age on it. I confess it: I recoiled from the idea of filmy women's apparel being produced in such nasty atomic ambiance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This is unfair to the Mariana Islands, of course, which are populated by Chamorros, Carolinians and Micronesians who had nothing whatever to do with atomic bombings. In fact, since the Marianas comprise a commonwealth of the United States and its residents are American citizens, its produce was one of the few examples of mart-quality women's wear that could truthfully be labeled "Made in U.S.A."We are talking here of how easy it is to shock a smugly uninformed mind that has a high opinion of its quality. Doubtless you, reader, have always known that those sturdy he-man outdoors garments advertised in that swell catalog of rugged stuff for rugged outdoors guys is all made in Asia.Not I. I had always assumed it was laboriously hand-stitched by aged Indian craftsmen working with ancient tribal tools passed down to them from long-dead generations of caribou trackers and laborious hand-stitchers.What a blow to this romantic vision of American commerce when I wandered into mountains of this very stuff piled high in one of those all-under-one-roof-mall marts. Every bit had been made in Asia, probably by the same hard-worked nickel-an-hour laborers who turned out the women's ready-to-wear.AdvertisementThanks to long exposure to journalism, mine is a mind that does not bruise easily, no matter how grave the insult. My friend Clark's is made of nobler stuff.He just telephoned angrily about a pot he bought at an outlet mart. Clark was not enticed by the Asian threads in which the mart specialized, but he couldn't resist the pot because it bore the "Revere" label, suggesting an old Boston tradition of workmanship. Back home, inspecting it, he found "Made in Korea.""I feel insulted," he tells me, swearing to return to the mart and do something rude. Poor fellow. Soon we will all here be Made in Korea, Taiwan, China, Indonesia, Sri Lanka . . .We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this op-ed appears in print on January 3, 1995, on Page A00019 of the National edition with the headline: Observer; Wakes Up In Marts.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

FOREIGN investors have lost billions of dollars in Mexico, and the recriminations are flying. American investors want to know why their Government didn't warn them that the Mexican economy was sicker than it looked. The Mexican finance minister says things would not have gotten this bad if investors on Wall Street hadn't been so eager to send money. And as the United States Congress began balking at the Clinton Administration's proposal to bail out Mexico with $40 billion in loan guarantees, the Mexican stock market and the peso took another plunge.So what else is new?The history of foreign investing is littered with disaster stories. Governments fall, and their successors renege on their debts. Currencies are devalued. Bull markets collapse and in the rubble evidence of fraud emerges. The supposed experts who should have been on the lookout for problems were in fact too busy selling securities to pay attention.It has long been a truism of investing that foreigners tend to buy at the top of almost any market. That is probably because they are not paying attention when a foreign market is cheap, only noticing it after prices have doubled and tripled and then rushing in. At first the waves of foreign buying push prices up even more, bringing in even more foreign money. But no boom lasts forever. And when rumors of problems begin to spread, foreigners are unlikely to be among the first to hear them.Time after time in the late 19th century, British investors bought American securities, only to lose much of their money in a panic or in a bankruptcy that seemed to leave insiders unscathed. J. P. Morgan became the dominant banker in America in part because he was trusted by British investors to try to protect their interests. They needed protection from the likes of Jay Gould, who once kept control of the Katy Railroad (the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad), despite the opposition of most shareholders, by printing the announcement of the annual meeting in an obscure Kansas newspaper. By the time the shareholders, most of them British, found out about the meeting, it was too late.Advertisement"A lot of money was lost by foreigners investing in the United States," said James B. Rogers, Jr., a former Wall Street money manager known for his investing in risky foreign markets. "But those who got it right made a great deal of money investing in this debt-ridden underdeveloped country."In fact, the Mexican debacle is, in many ways, tame by historical standards, even by Mexican historical standards. As recently as 1982, the Mexicans defaulted on promises to pay high interest rates on American dollars deposited in their banks, instead paying off the deposits in sharply devalued pesos. But this year, similar promises made by the Mexican Government have been honored, greatly reducing the losses for investors. And so far, the drop in Mexican stocks has not been tinged by scandal.That is not always the case. Two decades ago, during a wild bull market in Hong Kong that drew in a lot of foreign money, some enterprising people took advantage of the swell by printing and selling counterfeit share certificates. Brokerage back offices were so overwhelmed by heavy trading that it was some time before they noticed the counterfeits. Soon after, the market crashed, and everyone lost money, whether or not they had been snookered into buying a phony certificate.Just three years ago, a boom in India's stock market was fueled by phony bank certificates, which were traded like money. Profits vanished when the fraud was uncovered."There is always the risk of unexpected developments in any kind of investing," notes Barton Biggs, the chief international strategist for Morgan Stanley. "In international markets, the risks are compounded" because markets are not as open as the American market.Foreign markets are also complicated by differences in accounting standards around the world. Standards can be surprisingly lax even in some major countries like Britain, where Robert Maxwell carried out a massive fraud without his auditors noticing. And in some countries, there are no real audits at all. China had a brief stock market boom in 1993 despite a lack of reliable profit figures. And last year the Bank of China, a government-owned bank, sold $500 million of bonds to American investors. Although the bank's balance sheet looked good, it was not audited by any other accounting firm. Instead, the figures were certified by the bank's very own in-house accountants.So far, that loan has not been a disaster for the lenders. But the willingness of investors to overlook the lack of an outside accountant is a sign that greed has gotten the better of them. "There are," says James Grant, the editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer, "cycles of financial credulity just as sure as there are business cycles."In the 1920's, Mr. Grant recalls in "Money of the Mind," his book on financial history, Ivan Krueger, a Swedish financier who dominated the world's match industry -- that's right, the things you light candles with -- borrowed huge sums of money at extraordinarily high interest rates. Although he used the best investment bankers, no one noticed that his auditing firm, a predecessor of today's Ernst & Young, had not certified his accounts. (In fact, they refused to do so because they could not confirm the figures.)AdvertisementWhen Krueger's fraud was eventually exposed, the American investment bankers were blamed, even by Swedish investors. The investors said they had relied on the bankers to investigate Krueger. Max Winkler, a financial commentator of the time whose own warnings had been ignored, responded to those pleas by quoting, "Mundus vult decipi -- ergo decipiatur." The world wants to be deceived -- let it therefore be deceived.Before the current Mexican crisis, there were in fact some warnings sounded. Last spring, Gert von der Linde, the retired chief economist of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, predicted the devaluation of Mexican currency. But his words were all but ignored. Indeed, most big Wall Street firms were eagerly recommending, and selling, Mexican investments right up until the peso fell.Now American government officials say they saw the risks in Mexico and began warning Mexican officials as early as late summer. But they decided not to sound a warning here because they believed that it was important to support the Mexican Government and economy, particularly in the wake of the bruising ratification battle over the North American Free Trade Agreement.There is plenty of precedent here, as well. In the 1920's American investors were persuaded to lend huge sums of money to Germany to help with its reconstruction and with reparations payments after World War I. The bankers who arranged the loans by selling bonds feared that Germany would default, and so did the American Government, but they kept quiet and emphasized how America would benefit from the loans, through increased trade. The fears, of course, were prescient.Historically, the excesses of international markets have produced big profits and big losses, with the losses killing investors' enthusiasm for years or even decades. Now, President Clinton appears to be trying to avoid discouraging Americans from investing in Mexico.Many Wall Street strategists argue that if Congress fails to approve the loan guarantees to Mexico, it will be playing Russian roulette with the hemisphere's economy. They say that America's responsibility to the economy far outweighs any concern about unjustly enriching foolish investors, whose bad bets on Mexico will prove much less costly to them if the bailout is approved.That is an argument that grates on Mr. Grant, who thinks that the loan guarantees would be a bailout not of Mexico but of reckless investors. "This scheme has shown that Wall Street is not in favor of free markets," he said last week. "It is in favor of free bull markets. It is so much opposed to bear markets that it would like the Government to intervene to stop them."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 1995, on Page 4004003 of the National edition with the headline: The Nation; How Foreigners Invest, And Lose Their Shirts. 
A HAND FOR THE HUNGRYHelping Hands for the Homeless and Hungry, a Rye-based nonprofit organization, will benefit from the Winter in Rye Antiques Show, today from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Rye Middle School on Route 1.Sixty-five dealers will participate, and the admission of $4.50 will be reduced to $4 for anyone taking a can or box of food.Variety is the spice of this show. A sampling of the unusual merchandise includes Wallace Nutting prints, kerosene and other vintage lighting, oyster plates, 18th-century French armchairs, a pre-1820's museum-quality quilt, medical and dental items, black history items, vintage watches, English majolica sunflower plates, Victorian inlaid necktie presses, prison art, bird cages and writing boxes.In addition, there will be estate jewelry, linens and laces, bottles, rugs, toys, paintings, china and glass.AdvertisementYellow and black signs point the way to the school, off Exit 19 of Interstate 95. WHITHER WHITE PLAINS?A discussion of economic development in White Plains is to be held at a meeting of the Building Owners and Managers Association of Westchester on Thursday at 5:30 P.M. at the Crowne Plaza White Plains. The topic will be "Downtown Revitalization: A Catalyst for Economic Growth."Joseph R. Potenza, planning commissioner for White Plains and executive director of its Urban Renewal Agency, will talk about an updated comprehensive plan for the municipality. The plan includes improvement of the downtown shopping district and completion of the Central Urban Renewal Project.Offering a view from Stamford -- White Plains's retailing rival -- will be Sandra Goldstein, a director of the Stamford Downtown Consortium, the Chamber of Commerce and the Mayor's Multicultural Council and a former president of the Stamford Board of Legislators. Her subject will be how the redevelopment of Stamford's downtown was accomplished.The cocktail reception, dinner and two speeches cost $50. The number to call for reservations and information is 328-9703. AUSCHWITZ MEMORIESThe train ride to Auschwitz, how Joseph Mengele selected his victims and death marches are to be recalled in a talk by Livia Krancberg, a 76-year-old survivor of the concentration camp at Auschwitz.The program will be held tomorrow at 1:30 P.M. in Reisinger Auditorium of Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers.Ms. Krancberg's testimony is included in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's Archives and the Yale University Archives, among others, and she is participating in the oral history recording of "Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation," produced by Steven Spielberg.AdvertisementShe has lectured in many colleges and high schools in the New York City area and was honored by her community, Woodbridge, N.J., for her contributions to preserving Holocaust history.Her lecture is part of Sarah Lawrence's commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. Admission is free. For information and directions, the number is 395-2411. H-TWO-OH!Water, water is everywhere at the "Sea and Shore" exhibition opening today at the Hopper House Art Center in Nyack. The 10-artist invitational show will run through March 26.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Streams, rivers, oceans, ponds and lakes are depicted, "making visual the certainty that spring is just around the corner," said D. Robert Brebbia, the show's curator and one of the exhibiting artists. The other painters are Allan F. Avery, Janet F. Avery, Elwood G. Bengert, Beverly B. Colgan, James Harrington, Martha L. Heatley, Henri Jatho, Sally Spivack and Edward M. Warzala.The paintings are soothingly traditional, executed in watercolor, oils or acrylics.The center, at 82 North Broadway in Nyack, was once the boyhood home of the painter Edward Hopper.A reception will be held today from noon to 5 P.M. Regular hours thereafter are Fridays from 5 to 8 P.M. and Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 5 P.M. Admission is free, or by donation of $1. More information is available by calling 358-0774. SINGING OUTThe Boys Choir of Harlem, founded in 1968 as a small church group, has become a major musical institution with an infectious, irresistible style. Under the guidance of its director, Dr. Walter J. Turnbull, the choir has toured Europe, the United States and Asia, entertaining at the White House, the United Nations and in Manhattan's concert halls.The choir will appear in concert on Saturday at 7 P.M. in the Academic Arts Theater of Westchester Community College in Valhalla, performing a wide-ranging repertory of sacred music, gospel, ragtime, jazz and spirituals. Tickets at $15 and $10 for children and people 65 and older can be reserved by calling 785-6567.  MUSIC FOR YOUNGER SETJoanie Bartels's performances on Nickelodeon and the Disney Channel have earned the approval not only of young viewers but also of Parents magazine and Child magazine.AdvertisementShe will appear today at 1:30 P.M. at the Tarrytown Music Hall, 13 Main Street, in a concert of music that moves from Brahms to the Beatles, her own compositions, rock 'n' roll and Broadway show tunes. Singing and strumming her guitar, she puts on a choreographed show that appeals to many parents. Her audiocassette called "Lullaby" won a gold record.Tickets are $12 at the door. The number to call for information is 693-7898. THE CREATIVE CHILDThe College of New Rochelle will begin a five-week program for creative children from 4 to 12 years old on Saturday mornings. The sessions will last an hour and a half, and there will be two sessions each Saturday at 9 A.M. and 10:30 A.M., starting this week.Children will be divided into three age groups from pre-kindergarten through sixth grade, and they may choose from subjects like science, art, drama, architecture, computers and business. One five-week course costs $80, and children who sign up for both courses will be charged $140. Discounts are available for more than one child in a family.Dr. Susan Baum, assistant professor of education of gifted and talented children in the college's graduate school, developed the program, she said, because of "budget cuts in many Westchester schools that have done away with gifted and talented programs."The college is at 29 Castle Place in downtown New Rochelle. The information number is 654-5330. DO-IT-YOURSELFIf the extent of your home maintenance skills is limited to changing a light bulb, you might want to attend a series of three free workshops aimed at making you handier around the house and saving money on repair bills.Sol Berkowitz will conduct the workshops, sponsored by the Cornell Cooperative Extension of Westchester, at the downtown New Rochelle Public Library off North Avenue. "Leaky Faucets" will be the program this Wednesday from 2 to 4 P.M., followed by "Simple Home Repairs" on March 22 and "Lamp Repairs" on April 5. The registration number is 632-7878. ELEANOR CHARLESWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 1995, on Page WC13 of the National edition with the headline: WESTCHESTER GUIDE. 
A sampling of places to go and dance, throughout the city. Many have cover charges; call ahead.  THE BIG CLUBS  LIMELIGHT Sixth Avenue at 20th Street, (212) 807-7850. Tuesday to Sunday 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme/ music: Tuesday, alternative; Wednesday, half-gay, half-straight; Thursday through Saturday, house, techno; Sunday, rock & roll and live bands. Door policy: "Neat but casual, avoid ripped jeans, sneakers, gold chains, hoodlum-wear."  WEBSTER HALL 125 East 11th, (212) 353-1600. Wednesday to Saturday 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme/ music: Wednesday, runway parties -- "Walk down the runway and pretend you're a model"; Thursday, psychedelic night; Friday and Saturday, downtown rock and roll crowds; four different DJ's on four floors playing disco, rock, pop and reggae. Door policy: "Everyone gets in as long as they're not drunk or unruly." No torn jeans. PALLADIUM126 East 14th Street, (212) 473-7171. Thursday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-5 A.M. Music: House, hip/ hop and reggae. Door policy: No jeans, sneakers or gold chains.  THE TUNNEL 47 West 20th Street, (212) 695-7292. Thursday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme/music: Techno, house. Door policy: "Dress well enough to be out dancing with no big fat gold chains." THE ROXY 515 West 18th Street, (212) 645-5156. Tuesday, Wednesday, 8 P.M.-2 A.M.; closed Thursday and sometimes Friday; Saturday, 11 P.M.-4 A.M.; Sunday, 1:30 P.M.-6 P.M. Skate rental: $3.50 to $10, depending on the night. Theme: Tuesday and Wednesday, rollerskating and rollerblading; Saturday, gay night. Door policy: "Look for people who are trendy and wild."  SMALLER CLUBS  NELL'S 246 West 14th Street, (212) 675-1567. 10 P.M.-4 A.M, every night. CHINA CLUB 2130 Broadway, (212) 877-1166. 10 P.M.-4 P.M., every night. Music: current dance music, plus some live rock & roll. Door policy: "Regulars get in first."  THE BANK 225 East Houston, (212) 505-5033. Friday, Saturday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme: Friday, "The Realm," gothic, new wave, industrial; Saturday, "Exedor," alternative, danceable gothic.  205 205 Chrystie, (212) 473-5816.  Every night, 10:30-4 A.M.  Themes: Monday, "Concrete Jungle"; Tuesday, "Bingo Bango Etc."; Wednesday, funk; Thursday, guest DJs; Friday, Saturday, "S.O.A.P." (hiphop, gangster rap, dance music), Sunday, "Maroons."  REBAR 127 Eighth Avenue, (212) 627-1680. From 8 P.M.-4 P.M.; Sunday 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Themes: Tuesday, "Debalicious," house; Wednesday, "Snog," 80's music; Friday, Saturday, everything; Sunday, "Cafe de Paris," a musical timeline. BUDDHA BAR 150 Varick Street, (212) 255-4433. 9 P.M.-4 A.M. every night. Theme/music: Tuesdays are backgammon night; Sundays for ladies only. Wednesdays, hip-hop; Thursdays, progressive soul; Fridays, latin music, house, soul to nostalgic music.DON HILL'S 511 Greenwich Street at the corner of Spring Street, (212) 219-2850. Tuesday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Music: Downtown. VELVET 600 West 26th Street, at Eleventh Avenue, (212) 675-9602 or 675-9607. Thursday and Friday, 11 P.M.; Saturday, 10 P.M. and Sunday, 8:30 P.M. Theme: Thursday, Tribe; Bliss on Fridays; Latin, house and classics on Saturday, and "Velvet Sundays," with disc jockeys.  Q-CLUB 93-37 150th Street, Jamaica, (718) 262-0733. Wednesday to Saturday, 10:30 P.M. to 5 A.M.  Theme: Caribbean music, reggae, disco, calypso and R&B. Wednesday is "Dance All Night"; Thursday, Hip Hop; Friday, Ladies Night; Saturday, varies. RIDDLERS 1860 Westchester Avenue, the Bronx. (718)822-9291. Mixed music. BENTLEY'S 7110 Third Avenue (between 71st and 72d Streets), Bay Ridge, (718) 745-0748. Till 4 A.M., everynight. Theme/music: Top 40 dance, disco, pop. Door policy: No men under 25, no women under 23.LEGENDS 639 Utica Avenue (between Winthrop and Clarkson Streets), Flatbush, Brooklyn. (718) 778-0500. 11 P.M.-4 A.M. Fridays and Saturdays. Theme/ music: Reggae, calypso, slow jam and house music. THE ARK , 135 East 22d Street, East Flatbush, Brooklyn. (718) 693-2168. Friday through Sunday, 10 P.M. to 4 A.M. Music: Friday night, reggae, R&B, house. Saturday, R&B, "oldies but goodies," and usually a live show. Sunday is Love Boat Reggae Sunday, i.e., reggae all night. Door policy: No men under 25, no women under 23. Saturday is "more mature." No jeans, no sneakers.  GAY  JACKIE 60 432 West 14th Street, (212) 677-6060. Tuesday only.  SOUND FACTORY 530 West 27th Street, (212) 643-0728. Saturday only, 1 A.M.-whenever, $20.  LESBIAN  GIRL BAR 15 St. Marks Place, (212) 674-7959. Usually Friday.  BARROOM 432 West 14th Street. Saturday.  AFTERHOURS  BERLIN 1 West 125th Street (downstairs), (718) 617-4783. Fridays only, midnight on. ROVING PARTIES  AQUA-BOOTY!  (212) 229-7777, monthly underground parties. KONCRETE JUNGLE (212) 604-4224. Next event will be held today at S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, (212) 243-4940.  10 P.M.-4 A.M. "Kings of the Jungle, Live and Direct from the U.K." LATIN  CLUB BROADWAY 2551 Broadway, between 95th and 96th Streets, (212) 864-7600. Friday, 9 P.M.-4 A.M., Saturday, 9 P.M.-5:30 A.M., Sunday, 8 P.M.-3 A.M. Music: Live Latino bands. Sundays are "Baile Mexicano."Door policy: "Bien vestido, no tenis, no jeans." CLUB BROADWAY 2 2700 Queens Plaza South (by 59th Street Bridge), Long Island City, (718) 937-7111.  Thursday, 6 P.M. to 3 A.M., Friday, Saturday and last Sunday of each month, 8 P.M. to 5 A.M. Theme/music: Salsa, salsa, salsa. Door policy: Well dressed. COPA CABANA 617 West 57th Street, (212) 582-2672. Tuesday, Friday, 6 P.M.-3 A.M.; Saturday, 10 P.M.-A.M. Door policy: Minimum age: 23 for women, 25 for men. "No jeans, no sneakers, no work boots, no T-shirts." S.O.B.'S 204 Varick Street (at Seventh Avenue), (212) 243-4940.   every night, opening and closing varies.Theme/music: Monday, Latin music; Tuesday, Soul Kitchen, classic R&B; Wednesday, variable; Thursday, 11 P.M., hiphop jazz; Friday, French-Caribbean dance party; Saturday, Brazilian dance party; Sunday, variable.  Dress code: "Casual."  BALLROOM/OLDIES  BOOK-FRIENDS CAFE 16 West 18th Street, (212) 255-7407.  Cover: $5.  Alternate Wednesdays, tea dance (traditional ballroom dancing with 30's flavor), 7-10 P.M.  Alternate Fridays, vintage dancing (pre-World War, includes workshop and demonstration), 8-10:30 P.M.  Dress code: "Civilized." ROSELAND 239 West 52d Street, (212) 247-0200. Call for information.  CHARISMA BALLROOM 71-46 Main Street, Flushing, (718) 268-2800. Call for information.  SWING  CONTINENTAL CLUB Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, Sunday night. Call New York Swing Dance Society, (212) NY-NYSDS.  WELLS RESTAURANT 2247 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, (212) 234-0700. Monday night.  METROPOLIS 31 Union Square (at 16th Street), (212) 455-0401, Tuesday. THE HUSTLE  HUSTLE HOTLINE 1-800-92-HUSTLE. (Places to go.)We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this list appears in print on February 12, 1995, on Page 13013011 of the National edition with the headline: Sampling: Where to Go. 
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown has traveled to Belgium, Spain, India and the Middle East in the last month, working to broker complicated deals on behalf of American businesses. But back at home, his new role as global rainmaker has been overshadowed by Justice Department and Congressional investigations into the complicated deals he set up when he was a private lawyer, a lobbyist and the Democratic Party chairman.Friends say he is being pilloried for the same kind of networking skills that led President Clinton to call him "the best Commerce Secretary we've ever had." Republicans counter that evidence is emerging of fast and loose practices that go beyond the wheeling and dealing that long ago earned Mr. Brown a reputation as someone who skirts the ethical line.Investigations now under way by the Justice Department, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Congressional Republicans have so far drawn only modest public attention, involving as they do a blizzard of numbing details.Mr. Brown's main Republican critic, Representative William F. Clinger of Pennsylvania, accused him today of violating Federal laws by filing inaccurate financial disclosure reports, illegally supplementing his Federal salary, engaging in potential conflicts of interest and providing inaccurate information to Congress.AdvertisementMr. Brown was in Spain today, trying to help American companies win contracts there, and could not be reached for comment. But as recently as Thursday he told a House panel that "there has been no improper activity, impropriety on my part."Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid Weingarten, expressed confidence that the Justice Department would not find any wrongdoing by his client. But even Mr. Brown's allies acknowledge he has failed to dispel the air of suspicion that surrounds his finances.Documents gathered from Mr. Brown's critics have allowed a fragmentary picture to emerge of his most lucrative single business relationship, a partnership with a Texas businesswoman named Nolanda Hill. Congressional investigators are focusing on these points, among others:*Ms. Hill's payment of about $400,000 to Mr. Brown for his stake in a small importing company, First International, in which he had invested no money and which apparently made no profits.*Payments from another company Ms. Hill owned, Corridor Broadcasting, to First International. Investigators think the payments may have been part of an effort to siphon money from Corridor before Federal agencies could seize its assets. Corridor had defaulted on almost $40 million in loans held by Government agencies.*The F.D.I.C.'s handling of Corridor's default, which cost taxpayers $23 million. A former chairman of the agency described its actions as unusually generous. The F.D.I.C.'s inspector general is investigating.*Other small companies partly or entirely owned by Mr. Brown that appeared to rely on his political connections. Among those companies is one he sold for more than $500,000 in 1993, Capital Pebsco, that marketed pension services to municipalities run by Democrats. Republicans have raised questions about up to $140,000 that the company paid Mr. Brown in brokerage fees in 1992 and about his decision not to disclose his stake in another business, Kellee Communications. They say Kellee's pay-phone operation contracts with AT&T posed a potential conflict of interest, because Mr. Brown had helped AT&T win telecommunications equipment contracts abroad.Ms. Hill has declined to comment, but her lawyer, George Terwilliger 3d, has said she did nothing wrong.Friends of Mr. Brown have suggested that criticisms of his First International profits are naive. In the real world, they say, companies are willing to pay for an association with a prominent and successful person. The Importer  Growing Clout And a ConnectionAdvertisementMr. Brown has been around prominent and successful people all of his life. As the son of a Harlem hotel manager, Mr. Brown grew up in a swirl of celebrities like Joe Louis and Louis Armstrong. He made his mark in Washington during the 1970's as a lawyer for the National Urban League, then worked briefly for Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts. He joined Patton Boggs, a powerful Washington law and lobbying firm, in 1981.It was after Mr. Brown became head of the Democratic National Committee in 1989 that he met Ms. Hill. Their business associates say that Mr. Brown's political clout provided the attraction for the business relationship that developed. "At that time, Ron Brown was a lawyer who was taking over the Democratic Party and seemed to have a very bright future," said Billy B. Hill, Ms. Hill's former husband and a Dallas lawyer.Ms. Hill gave Mr. Brown a free stake in First International when she set it up in 1990. Yet Mr. Brown's name was not enough. The company tried unsuccessfully to import oil from Angola and Saudi Arabia, hand-painted china and art posters from Poland and wine from Hungary.Mr. Brown has said he gave the company his financial acumen, judgment and insight. The only clear sign that First International ever tried to trade on the relationship after Mr. Brown became Commerce Secretary in January 1993 is a memorandum that Ms. Hill wrote on First International stationery in May 1993. In the memo, she sought Mr. Brown's help in arranging a meeting in Russia between Commerce Department officials and John B. Foster, another of her business partners.Mr. Brown has said that he had no recollection of ever receiving the memorandum and that no such meeting took place. But Mr. Clinger said today that among the potential conflicts of interest from Mr. Brown's business dealings, "that is certainly the one that jumps out at us."Even as deal after deal was falling through, First International was in no danger of collapse, thanks to help from Corridor, which covered many of its expenses and provided office space.Mr. Brown's role in First International was first revealed by The Washington Post in 1993, and he and his aides repeatedly denied last year that there was any connection between First International and Corridor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. Clinger disclosed last month that First International's main source of income was a promissory note from Corridor Broadcasting that paid at least $600,000 over the last four years.Mr. Brown now says Ms. Hill never told him of the note.Several mysteries surround the promissory note. One is why Corridor continued to pay interest on it even though it had stopped paying interest in 1988 on the loan held by the F.D.I.C. Another mystery is the steep interest rate: 16.4 percent. The Broadcaster  The Aftermath Of Unpaid LoansAdvertisementBorn in Texas, Corridor Broadcasting bought ultra-high-frequency television stations in Washington and Boston in 1985 with more than $30 million in loans from high-flying Texas savings associations like Sunbelt Savings. Within three years, it was unable to make interest payments on the loans. When its lenders all failed and were taken over during the next several years by the F.D.I.C. or another Federal agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, the collection of the debts became the Federal Government's problem.The trust corporation wrote off several loans to Corridor totaling more than $13 million as total losses. The F.D.I.C. inspector general is now looking into the F.D.I.C.'s handling of the biggest debt, a $26.3 million loan.The F.D.I.C. auctioned the loan in 1993 for just $3 million. The buyer was the Jasas Corporation, owned by two of Ms. Hill's business associates, Mr. Foster and his wife, Barbara Foster. The Fosters foreclosed on the loan, seized both of Corridor's television stations and hired Ms. Hill to run them. Congressional investigators have questioned whether the auction was fair because Ms. Hill had negotiated with the Fosters a year earlier about buying Corridor itself.By the F.D.I.C.'s own account, other bidders had limited access to Corridor's books. That gave an advantage to Ms. Hill's business associates, who knew a lot about Corridor's finances. L. William Seidman, the F.D.I.C.'s chairman in the late 1980's, called that unusual."One would have to suspect someone was getting an inside opportunity," he said. "If I had been around and that information had been given to me, I would have had the inspector general take a fast look at it."F.D.I.C. investigators are also trying to determine if money was improperly drained from Corridor before its collapse. Corridor did a lot of business with Ms. Hill's other companies. Corridor also made payments to two companies in which Mr. Brown owned stakes, First International and Harmon International, which leased equipment to Corridor's Washington television station.Corridor employed Mr. Brown's daughter-in-law, Tamara Brown, and paid $2,000 a month for six months to his daughter, Tracy Brown, to provide a mailing address, answering machine and fax machine in New York. Corridor also paid a $15,000 investment banking fee, later returned, to one of Mr. Brown's longtime friends, James Hackney, who is now the Commerce Department counselor.In addition, the company contributed $63,825 to the Democratic Party in 1991 and 1992, even as it was telling the F.D.I.C. that it had no money for interest payments.AdvertisementCorridor also made a videotape of Mr. Brown that was shown at the Democratic National Convention. But Federal Election Commission documents show that the $75,000 the Democratic National Committee paid for it went to another of Ms. Hill's companies, Columbia Productions.The Commerce Department drafts Administration positions on telecommunications issues that could affect Corridor, but there is no evidence that any such positions have been taken in this Administration. The Sale  A Three-Part Deal Yields QuestionsThe roughly $400,000 that Mr. Brown collected for his stake in First International came not in a single check but in a complex three-part transaction.Mr. Clinger expressed open disbelief today about one of those parts, the payment of $135,000 by a limited partnership apparently spun off from First International. Noting that the money was paid in quarterly installments on consecutive checks well before Mr. Brown sold his stake, Mr. Clinger said today that this represented inappropriate income for a Federal official and should have been reported separately on Mr. Brown's Federal financial disclosure forms.Mr. Brown never mentioned the partnership on his financial disclosure forms and has given no explanation other than that the money was made part of the sale once the sale was arranged.Ms. Hill also repaid $190,000 of Mr. Brown's personal and legal debts, using a go-between, a Boston lawyer named Harry Barnett. Some of the money came from Jasas Corporation and was passed through a third company's account, although the Fosters have said they were unaware of the transaction.Finally, Ms. Hill forgave the $72,000 balance of a debt that Mr. Brown owed to another of her companies, Know Inc. Mr. Brown had originally borrowed the money from a Washington bank that later failed and was taken over by the F.D.I.C.A Connecticut businessman, acting at the suggestion of Billy Hill, bought the debt from the F.D.I.C. in 1991 with Mr. Brown's permission and then transferred it to Ms. Hill in a debt swap. F.D.I.C. officials have described the transaction as unusual because loans of less than $100,000 are usually sold only in large bundles.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: Web of Business Connections Haunts Commerce Secretary. 
ABOUT 20 YEARS AGO, WHILE answering an intrusive telephone poll, I stumbled on a bit of legal philosophy that could serve the planet for at least a century. I am assuming (a) that the 21st will be the Information Century, (b) that there will be no World War III to distract humanity from its lust for trade and profit and (c) that post-Marxist China will by then have stopped selling goods based on copyright theft.That telephone pollster called, naturally, in the middle of dinner. He asked what kind of car I dreamed of owning next. Fortunately, I was annoyed."Do you get paid for asking that?""Yes, sir.""Well, then, how much will I get for my answer?""Why nothing, sir. We have selected you so that we can learn how to serve you better."With no thought at all, I heard myself inventing a doctrine that I have smugly invoked ever since: "No pay, no say."AdvertisementKnowing that my answers would be sold not only to the inquiring auto maker but also to rafflemongers, credit-card usurers, catalogue peddlers and countless junk mailers, I decided that information about me, like anything created by me, is valuable property. You want it for your business, let's deal.Alas, the good people who conduct The New York Times's political polls may deplore my attitude. They believe, as I do, that polling serves democracy -- and that we should never pollute the news by paying for it. If too many people were to take my advice and withhold their opinions, the voter samples would be hopelessly distorted. Then again, if in a few years we will all be routinely sending opinions to Washington by E-mail, polls will have been overtaken and democracy rendered unrecognizable.So for the moment I cling to my principle: In the Age of Information, Information Is Property. Let the lawyers work out the details.I WAS REMINDED OF MY SIMPLISTIC DOCTRINE at a recent conference on "Intellectual Property Rights and the Arts: The Impact of New Technologies." An impressive roster of performers, producers, writers, publishers, curators and lawyers had been assembled by Martin E. Segal, the chairman of the New York International Festival of the Arts, to confront the growing fear that computers are upsetting relationships among the creators, purveyors and consumers of art and ideas. As Hal David, the lyricist ("Promises, Promises"), put it, creative people these days are feeling like "road kill on the information superhighway" -- helpless to prevent the infinite replication of their words, pictures and songs.Presenters and publishers, on the other hand, are afraid that a "tollbooth" royalty for each and every Internet replication will impede the progress of technology. They cite evidence that the evolution of computers depends on their carrying ideas and images that people will want and want to copy -- and that making copies is an essential attribute of computers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Indeed, it has already become very difficult to stop unethical copying in cyberspace. As Junda Woo and Jared Sandberg reported in the fall in The Wall Street Journal, even the muscular Walt Disney Company has been unable to prevent the circulation on the Internet of "troves of drawings of Disney characters as well as full-color scenes from Disney animated movies, including 'Aladdin' and 'Beauty and the Beast' " -- some of them disfigured, some even disrobed. "At a push of a keyboard button," the reporters noted, "anyone can copy drawings, computer games, photographs of supermodels, film stills, song snippets and newspaper articles. With another push of a button, copies can be sent to a vast audience without the original copyright owner ever getting wind of it, much less a royalty."Not invited to Segal's conference, but noisily scoffing into the ether, were the infomaniacs who bombard the Internet and hot magazines like Wired with declarations of war against the copyright establishment. They are touting "artists of appropriation," who claim a right to embellish the words, images and sounds of others in the spirit of "collage." One of their prophets has predicted the collapse of the entire art industry: "Digital art is the apotheosis of art in the age of mechanical reproduction. The very distinction between original and copy becomes meaningless in a digital world -- there the work exists only as a copy." Net surfers unite! You have nothing to lose but your editors, distributors and brokers!WE ARE HURTLING INTO A LEGAL VOID. I can say "No pay, no say" to a pollster, but I have no clear legal right to stop the phone company from selling my name and address to merchandisers. How then will I stop computers from routinely merging and merchandising my medical and credit records? How will I stop them from reproducing my picture or picturing me in fictional settings? How will I ever be paid for my writing if it is endlessly copied and altered in cyberspace?I am sure that the same technologies that threaten privacy and creative rights could in time be harnessed to help protect them. Computers could be taught to encode Internet words and images, to record their migrations and usurpations, even to bill for their use. But as Anne Wells Branscomb wrote last year in a wide-ranging study ("Who Owns Information: From Privacy to Public Access"), our concepts of information rights are rooted in the 18th century. They won't do in the 21st. The principles underlying the First Amendment and our copyright, patent and privacy laws no longer suffice to define which information deserves to be private property -- and when it should be sacrificed to social or technological priorities.AdvertisementShe offers hundreds of examples of new difficulties in information law and ethics. Consider, she asks, the value to patients and doctors of compiling uniform medical data -- but then consider the danger, for each, as others inevitably gain access to the data. Or consider what will happen when the names and addresses, ages and Social Security numbers that we routinely disclose are linked by unseen hands with computer records of our movie rentals, shopping habits and investments.Branscomb concludes that the courts and Congress will have to learn to treat information "as an asset with legal attributes, not unlike real estate or personal possessions." Not until even the plainest information -- your name, address and phone number -- is philosophically recognized as valuable property will government be able to write new laws to protect it against misappropriation, to govern its commercial reproduction and to specify when society may claim it for the common good. It's her sophisticated version of "No pay, no say.""We spend billions of dollars on the machines that make it possible to access information and billions upon billions to gather, manipulate, distribute and archive information," Branscomb writes, "but we spend little on understanding the economics of information, less on developing a law of information and perhaps only a little more on worrying about the ethics of information."In other words, let's not forget to invest also in law and ethics, because where there's pay, we'll find a way. I accept the amendment.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 1995, on Page 6006026 of the National edition with the headline: WORD & IMAGE; Cyberights.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

THE names were threaded through Gov. George E. Pataki's State of the State Message yesterday, the women in his government. He just mentioned their names and titles, said no more, but the message was not lost on his listeners, especially his Democratic listeners. "Look at all those women," a Democratic stalwart, who shall remain nameless at her request, fairly screeched into the telephone. "In real jobs. Look at that. Do you believe it?"Mr. Pataki has indeed appointed a lot of women to prominent positions in his new administration -- most of them substantial jobs, not token ones or "women's" jobs. The budget director is a woman. The Health Commissioner is a woman. So is the Parks Commissioner, the communications director and the Social Services Commissioner. And of course Mr. Pataki's running mate, Elizabeth P. McCaughey, is now the Lieutenant Governor and designated Medicaid expert.That is, by any measure, a large number of women, even slightly more than Gov. Mario M. Cuomo named to substantial jobs in his government at any one time. Maybe this should not come as a surprise. Mr. Pataki may be a committed feminist. It would have been hard to know that, though, because his campaign was so controlled that New Yorkers learned his views on few issues, except tax cutting and government shrinking.It is a bit counterintuitive because the Democratic Party takes a rather proprietary interest in the women's movement, while Republicans sometimes sound hostile, letting their talk-show champions use words like "femi-Nazis" with impunity and suggesting that feminism and "family values" are warring concepts.AdvertisementOF course, many Republicans favor the advancement of women; it was Ronald Reagan who named the first woman to the Supreme Court, Sandra Day O'Connor. But Democrats did take the lead in advancing opportunities for women, and here comes Mr. Pataki with his many appointments, and he is not the only one. It is as if the Democrats not only had Congress and a few statehouses taken away from them, but the potent issue of feminism, too. What happened?Mr. Pataki's communications director, Zenia Mucha, did not respond to requests to discuss her boss's appointment philosophy. Ms. McCaughey, the Lieutenant Governor, says that, "As a very smart leader, George wants the best possible people working with him." Politics did not motivate him, she suggested.Others guess otherwise."Part of it is a very strategic decision to give visibility to women that may pay off at the polls," said Harriett Woods, president of the National Women's Political Caucus. "That's fine with me. Great. I don't care. Whatever works. I guess what I'm saying is, in some strange way, it's sort of like Nixon opening up China. The Republicans may be more aggressive about bringing women in because that's not a constituency they've had, while Democrats have taken it for granted."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another issue is timing. "Some of what we're seeing is generational," suggested Susan Estrich, a professor of law and political science at the University of Southern California, who ran Michael Dukakis's presidential campaign. "George Pataki is 49. He went to college with smart women, he's grown up around smart women, he's used to being around smart women."AND there are more competent women in jobs outside the home. As Mr. Pataki is about to learn on other matters, change tends to be incremental in government, not revolutionary. The women's movement has been around for a generation, and at the same time, the economy pushed many women, feminists and nonfeminists, into jobs outside the home. Some have succeeded in government jobs, in Democratic and Republican administrations.In other words, the most fundamental objective of the women's movement -- opening up opportunities to women -- must be working. Otherwise, how could Mr. Pataki, Gov. Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey and Gov. John M. Engler of Michigan, among others, find accomplished women to appoint?"It proves how mainstream we've been all along in advocating that competent women should share the policy making in appointive as well as elective office," said Ms. Woods. "That is clearly not a very radical position when Republicans of all stripes are appointing women. It's a validation that there should be a level playing field."It is also validation that politics works. "Nobody in politics is unaware that women vote, vote in very large numbers, and sometimes vote somewhat differently from men," said Ruth B. Mandel, longtime director of the Center for the American Woman and Politics at Rutgers University. "Politically it has become a matter of good practice and politics to include women in an administration."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 1995, on Page B00006 of the National edition with the headline: METRO MATTERS; Non-Token Appointees Mark Women's Advance. 
Fifty years after the B-29 Superfortress Enola Gay was used to drop an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, the decision that ushered in the nuclear age is still the subject of fierce historical debate.The issue stirs enormous passions: at one pole speculative estimates of how many Americans would have died invading Japan, and were presumably spared because of the bombing, and at the other pole whether the attack in August 1945 was necessary to end the war.Indeed, some historians now contend that the bombing was aimed not so much at the wartime enemy Japan as at the wartime ally Soviet Union, delivered as a warning against postwar rivalry.The questions, sometimes raised by a new generation horrified at the death and destruction that rained on Hiroshima and, three days later, on Nagasaki, resonate harshly among World War II veterans, particularly those who survived the bloody fighting in the Pacific that took more than 41,000 American lives.AdvertisementIn the latest clash, the Smithsonian Institution, attacked by veterans groups and members of Congress for a World War II exhibit that they said was overly solicitous of Japan, has decided to drastically scale back the display: The narrative, already revised five times, will be dropped, and visitors will see only part of the Enola Gay's fuselage, along with a small commemorative plaque.Among historians digging through musty diaries, military records and memorandums from President Truman's Administration, opinions about the bombing of Hiroshima are no less firm than the veterans'."I think it can be proven that the bomb was not only unnecessary but known in advance not to be necessary," said Gar Alperovitz, a historian critical of the decision to drop the bomb and who has been studying the issue for some 30 years. Speaking in a telephone interview from Washington, he said, "The President fully understood and was advised that there were other ways to end the war." Mr. Alperovitz said he was planning to publish an extensive study on the subject this summer.By contrast, Robert Cowley, the editor of the Military History Quarterly, whose forthcoming spring issue is devoted to "The End of the War With Japan," said: "If you were in Truman's shoes and had this weapon and had the chance to end the war then and there, there's no question you would use the bomb. The problems of continuing the war were enormous."Barton J. Bernstein, a Stanford University historian who has figured in the Smithsonian uproar, said in a telephone interview that the bombing should be examined in the context of its time. Professor Bernstein said he was wary both of revisionist historians and the veterans.Many questions raised now, Professor Bernstein writes in the current issue of Foreign Affairs, "often fail to recognize that, before Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the use of the A-bomb did not raise profound moral issues for policymakers."He explained: "By early 1945, World War II -- especially in the Pacific -- had become virtually total war. The firebombing of Dresden  [ Germany ]  had helped set a precedent for the U.S. air force, supported by the American people, to intentionally kill mass numbers of Japanese citizens. The earlier moral insistence on noncombatant immunity crumbled during the savage war."Professor Bernstein helped ignite the latest furor when he convinced Smithsonian officials that casualty estimates for an invasion of Japan should be about 63,000, not the previous estimates of at least 229,000.AdvertisementThe question of projected casualties, Professor Bernstein said in an interview, "is so important to the vets" because any lessening of these numbers could be interpreted as raising questions about the need for the bombing and, in a sense, diminishing their own role.Casualty estimates have run as high as the half million cited in Truman's memoirs and the one million referred to by Winston Churchill.  These figures were often taken by the public to mean that these many lives had been saved. But Professor Bernstein and other historians note that the term casualties includes wounded as well as dead.They also note that these postwar estimates appear to be far higher than the figures that military planners were using at the time. Historians caution that all the figures, even those at the time, were speculative.Professor Bernstein said that he revised his casualty estimates last spring, after rereading the diary of Adm. William Leahy, the equivalent of the Chairman of the joint Chiefs of Staff at the end of World War II.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Admiral Leahy, he said, recounted how an estimate was advanced at a White House meeting of President Truman and his military advisers on June 18, 1945. Participants discussed a casualty figure of 35 percent.Professor Bernstein said the Army commander, Gen. George C. Marshall, had cited a 35 percent casualty figure for the entire invasion force, about 775,000 troops. But Professor Bernstein said his review of Admiral Leahy's diary indicated that the figure should have been applied only to combat troops, or about 190,000 men. The new calculation yielded 63,000 casualties.He conceded, however, that the 35 percent figure was made before American intelligence found indications of a large Japanese buildup in the Kyushu region, where an invasion was tentatively planned for the fall of 1945, which presumably would have meant more casualties.Truman and his advisers, who as veterans of World War I had their own memories of casualties, had seen troops devastated in Europe, and they knew that much of the Pacific battles were even tougher."Considering the horrific fighting on Iwo Jima and Okinawa, the prospect of invading Japan itself seemed nightmarish," Peter Maslowski, a professor at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, writes in the forthcoming Military History Quarterly.AdvertisementProfessor Maslowski outlines four possible options for President Truman, each with "weaknesses and potential risks." These were the bombing, an invasion, a negotiated settlement (which would presumably hinge on the politically difficult question of allowing the Emperor, revered as a God by the Japanese, to remain in some position of authority), and strangulation through both intensified conventional bombing and a tightened blockade."Looking back on the events of 1945 from a secure, peaceful, comfortable perch decades later, it is easy to criticize President Truman's decision to drop the atomic bombs," Professor Maslowski writes. "But considering the possible drawbacks associated with the other options, his choice was entirely logical and reasonable -- the least undesirable of four unhappy alternatives."Mr. Alperovitz disagrees. He contends that the Soviet Union's decision in July 1945 to join the war against Japan was expected by Mr. Truman to spell the end of the war, and that the Americans were already aware of peace overtures.Instead, he contends, American policy shifted, largely under the influence of Truman's old Congressional mentor James Byrnes, the Secretary of State, who wanted to block the Soviets from moving into northern China and to deliver a warning for the future.Mr. Cowley, the editor of the Military History Quarterly, agreed that the challenge to the Soviet Union was important, saying that if the Soviets had moved into the area "this would have changed the geopolitical ball game; Tokyo would become an oriental Berlin."Professor Bernstein also said that the Soviet gambit had figured in Truman's decision to use the bomb. So did the momentum of the $2 billion Manhattan Project, he said. Had the bomb been ready in time, he believes, it would have been used on Nazi Germany.Mr. Alperovitz and Professor Bernstein note that many of the generals, raised with a nobler notion of war, had worried about the implications of using the bomb. Admiral Leahy called it "barbaric."But these warriors' qualms were swept away in what Professor Bernstein called a "redefinition of morality that made Hiroshima and Nagasaki possible and ushered in the Atomic Age in such a frightening way.""That redefinition of morality was a product of World War II," Professor Bernstein writes, "which included such barbarities as Germany's systematic murder of six million Jews and Japan's rape of Nanking.  "While the worst atrocities were perpetrated by the Axis, all the major nation-states sliced away at the moral code -- often to the applause of their leaders and citizens alike. By 1945 there were few moral restraints left in what had become virtually a total war."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 1995, on Page A00016 of the National edition with the headline: Hiroshima: A Controversy That Refuses to Die. 
CHINESE NEW YEAR LION DANCES, starting tomorrow, with the Fu-Jow Pai Martial Arts troupe at 1 P.M. in front of the China Institute, 125 East 65th Street, Manhattan. Free. Featuring a Beijing opera demonstration and a face painting drop-in workshop at 2 P.M. Information: (212) 744-8181. Other lion dances are to be held on Tuesday, from noon to 6 P.M., in Chinatown, starting at 19 and 22 Mott Street; on Feb. 4 in Flushing, Queens, starting at 11 A.M., at 39-01 Main Street, and at 11 A.M., at Northern Boulevard and Main Street; on Feb. 5, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., at various locations throughout Chinatown, and on Feb. 5, in Borough Park, Brooklyn, starting at noon, at Eighth Avenue and 52d Street. Information: (212) 334-0726 or 334-0711. "WALT DISNEY'S WORLD ON ICE," a $6 million extravaganza of "Beauty and the Beast" on ice, with the Howard Ashman and Alan Menken score and Russian skaters. Today through Sunday at the Brendan Byrne Arena, Route 3, East Rutherford, N.J.; Jan. 31 to Feb. 5 at Nassau Coliseum, 1255 Hempstead Turnpike, Uniondale, L.I., and Feb. 17 to 26 at Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street. Various schedules. Tickets: At Byrne and Nassau, $12.50 to $32.50; at Radio City, $17.50 to $35. Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171, (201) 507-8900, (516) 888-9000 or (914) 454-3388."LET THE GARDENS LIVE: WINTER CANDLE-LANTERN PAGEANT," a campaign to save 50 Manhattan community gardens in the East Village and on the Lower East Side, with a pageant of glowing lanterns, giant puppets, dancers, a band and a bell chorus. Starting at 638 East Sixth Street, near Tompkins Square Park, and continuing to the Sixth Street and Avenue B Garden for a winter carnival of Butoh dancing, opera singing, drama, a bonfire and hot cider and roasted apples. Tomorrow at 6 P.M. (for volunteer participants) or 7 P.M. (for spectators). Free. Information: (212) 727-8283.  "PLANTS OF THE DESERT," a nature-arts workshop in which children 3 and older and a parent can forget about winter by sketching and painting cactuses in a greenhouse. At Wave Hill, West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx. Tomorrow and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M. (Drop-ins permitted) Admission waived this month and next; suggested workshop contribution: $4 a family. Information: (718) 549-3200. RIVERSIDE CHURCH CHILDREN'S CONCERT SERIES, the program's second year is to begin tomorrow with Hamiet Bluiett, a saxophonist playing jazz. Kim Laskowski and the Continental Quintet will perform on Feb. 25 and a performance of dance, poetry and piano music called "The Kangaroo Garden" is to take place on March 11. Tomorrow and March 11, concerts are at 1 P.M.; on Feb. 25, at 12:30 P.M. For children 4 and up with adults. Suggested fee: $5 for adults, $2 for children. The church entrance is on Claremont Avenue at 121st Street, Morningside Heights. Information: (212) 870-6722.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this schedule appears in print on January 27, 1995, on Page C00016 of the National edition with the headline: Keep in Mind. 
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last. The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth. Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession. Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.China, a favored destination for foreign investment, slowed down its unrelenting growth last year to 11 percent, a still-formidable rate that strained the capacity of aging industries and power grids. Japan, no longer the growth model for Asia, tried to climb out of its prolonged slump, with growth of barely 1 percent in 1994.Political developments rattled countries like Mexico, where the peso plummeted after being freed to float against the dollar. Eastern Europe continued to slough off old Communist habits. But in Russia, the best economic news may have been that growth dropped off only 8 percent in 1994, compared with double-digit declines in the previous two years.AdvertisementTrade liberalization became an international byword, notably with the North American Free Trade Association, now a year old. But frontier barriers were also lowered within Europe and Latin America, even as Washington's trade frictions with Japan and China festered. The European Union expanded to 15 countries. And the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade transformed itself into a sleeker new World Trade Organization.Russia finds itself at the end of another year in a now-familiar position, both politically and economically: the worst has not happened, but there is plenty of disappointment to go around.Since using tanks to win his confrontation with the old Parliament, President Boris N. Yeltsin has moved sharply toward the nationalist middle. But he continues to swear allegiance to the idea of a low-inflation market reform, as does his Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin.Still, the number of Western-oriented reformers in the Cabinet has become parlously small, and even the most powerful of them, Anatoly B. Chubais, a First Deputy Prime Minister, has a larger constituency among Western bankers and governments than he has domestically.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the Government has drafted an extremely tight budget for 1995, promising to take no more credits from the Central Bank to finance the deficit and projecting monthly inflation of 2 percent by the end of 1995, no one believes the Parliament will approve it. And no one can be sure that the Government will not once again, as it did last year, simply decide to ignore its own budget and start printing rubles in large numbers.After Russia's most serious effort so far at economic stabilization, which held monthly inflation down to 4.6 percent in August, the cost of breaking the budget during the summer became apparent; monthly inflation surged to 15 percent in the last quarter of the year -- roughly where it was in December 1993.The International Monetary Fund is contemplating providing as much as $12 billion in transitional and regular lending to Russia in 1995 -- in return for real stabilization. But the fund is having doubts about the ability of the Government to keep its promises as Russia's politics intensify. All officials are looking ahead to parliamentary elections in December 1995 and presidential ones the next June.Still, inflation-adjusted incomes are going up, an average of 5 percent a month, even though they still represent only 82 percent of the last decent Soviet year, in 1990. Real wages are up more than 20 percent from the beginning of price liberalization in June 1992, and so is real consumption, with a wide choice of goods. The average industrial wage is more than $100 a month, despite the ruble's drop in value against the dollar.Pensioners are being hurt less than the unemployed, whose number is rising gradually, or the larger numbers paid minimum salaries by factories that cannot pay them properly but do not want to discharge them. As many as nine million people, or about 11 percent of the work force, are thought to be unemployed or sharply underemployed, although the official jobless register is about a quarter of that figure.Privatization is continuing on a cash basis and Western investors are beginning to figure out a path through the twisted thicket of Russian regulations, duties and manifold taxes, which, if followed scrupulously, would make it impossible for anyone to do any business.Advertisement"No one tries to slam their brakes on a slippery road," said one senior American official optimistically, trying to explain why Russia's on-again, off-again overhaul was not so bad. "You've got to pump the brakes." STEVEN ERLANGERWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 1995, on Page C00010 of the National edition with the headline: OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most; Russia Faces Plenty Of Disappointment. 
Almost everything Americans buy is now made outside America. You knew that long ago. I knew it too, but I hadn't really believed it until various women took me shopping in December.This meant killing time in women's wear divisions of assorted marts. What a learning experience these marts afforded. I'd heard that marts were taking over the world, but I had never thought enough about marts to ask, "What is a mart anyhow?"Nothing beats on-site inspection. As a result I now know that a mart is a store selling goods made almost exclusively in Asia and Central America.During the hours women friends were shopping for perfection in female apparel I studied labels on women's clothing. Almost all of it, I was stupidly shocked to note, was made in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, the Philippines, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Honduras, Brazil and Mexico.AdvertisementOne mart was selling women's wear "Made in the United Arab Emirates." Something of a shock, that one. The idea of poor Arab women toiling for sweat-tent wages to produce clothes for American women clashed with my most ignorant and firmly held stereotypes of life in the Arab emirates.Camel saddles, yes, yes. Had I wandered into that great mart's Gifts for the Guy Who's Got It All department and noticed a camel saddle for sale, I would probably have thought, "I'll bet that's made in the United Arab Emirates." But women's wear?I, with my Western male white despicable arrogance, have ranted for years about American schoolchildren being dumb about geography. Yet all that time I'd been the true geography ignoramus, a dolt who didn't even know that the United Arab Emirates produced women's ready-to-wear.Even more astounding was a label saying "Made in the Northern Mariana Islands," because that's where the B-29's that carried the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs were based in 1945.How stiff and stuffy a mind can become with a little age on it. I confess it: I recoiled from the idea of filmy women's apparel being produced in such nasty atomic ambiance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This is unfair to the Mariana Islands, of course, which are populated by Chamorros, Carolinians and Micronesians who had nothing whatever to do with atomic bombings. In fact, since the Marianas comprise a commonwealth of the United States and its residents are American citizens, its produce was one of the few examples of mart-quality women's wear that could truthfully be labeled "Made in U.S.A."We are talking here of how easy it is to shock a smugly uninformed mind that has a high opinion of its quality. Doubtless you, reader, have always known that those sturdy he-man outdoors garments advertised in that swell catalog of rugged stuff for rugged outdoors guys is all made in Asia.Not I. I had always assumed it was laboriously hand-stitched by aged Indian craftsmen working with ancient tribal tools passed down to them from long-dead generations of caribou trackers and laborious hand-stitchers.What a blow to this romantic vision of American commerce when I wandered into mountains of this very stuff piled high in one of those all-under-one-roof-mall marts. Every bit had been made in Asia, probably by the same hard-worked nickel-an-hour laborers who turned out the women's ready-to-wear.AdvertisementThanks to long exposure to journalism, mine is a mind that does not bruise easily, no matter how grave the insult. My friend Clark's is made of nobler stuff.He just telephoned angrily about a pot he bought at an outlet mart. Clark was not enticed by the Asian threads in which the mart specialized, but he couldn't resist the pot because it bore the "Revere" label, suggesting an old Boston tradition of workmanship. Back home, inspecting it, he found "Made in Korea.""I feel insulted," he tells me, swearing to return to the mart and do something rude. Poor fellow. Soon we will all here be Made in Korea, Taiwan, China, Indonesia, Sri Lanka . . .We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this op-ed appears in print on January 3, 1995, on Page A00019 of the National edition with the headline: Observer; Wakes Up In Marts.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

FOREIGN investors have lost billions of dollars in Mexico, and the recriminations are flying. American investors want to know why their Government didn't warn them that the Mexican economy was sicker than it looked. The Mexican finance minister says things would not have gotten this bad if investors on Wall Street hadn't been so eager to send money. And as the United States Congress began balking at the Clinton Administration's proposal to bail out Mexico with $40 billion in loan guarantees, the Mexican stock market and the peso took another plunge.So what else is new?The history of foreign investing is littered with disaster stories. Governments fall, and their successors renege on their debts. Currencies are devalued. Bull markets collapse and in the rubble evidence of fraud emerges. The supposed experts who should have been on the lookout for problems were in fact too busy selling securities to pay attention.It has long been a truism of investing that foreigners tend to buy at the top of almost any market. That is probably because they are not paying attention when a foreign market is cheap, only noticing it after prices have doubled and tripled and then rushing in. At first the waves of foreign buying push prices up even more, bringing in even more foreign money. But no boom lasts forever. And when rumors of problems begin to spread, foreigners are unlikely to be among the first to hear them.Time after time in the late 19th century, British investors bought American securities, only to lose much of their money in a panic or in a bankruptcy that seemed to leave insiders unscathed. J. P. Morgan became the dominant banker in America in part because he was trusted by British investors to try to protect their interests. They needed protection from the likes of Jay Gould, who once kept control of the Katy Railroad (the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad), despite the opposition of most shareholders, by printing the announcement of the annual meeting in an obscure Kansas newspaper. By the time the shareholders, most of them British, found out about the meeting, it was too late.Advertisement"A lot of money was lost by foreigners investing in the United States," said James B. Rogers, Jr., a former Wall Street money manager known for his investing in risky foreign markets. "But those who got it right made a great deal of money investing in this debt-ridden underdeveloped country."In fact, the Mexican debacle is, in many ways, tame by historical standards, even by Mexican historical standards. As recently as 1982, the Mexicans defaulted on promises to pay high interest rates on American dollars deposited in their banks, instead paying off the deposits in sharply devalued pesos. But this year, similar promises made by the Mexican Government have been honored, greatly reducing the losses for investors. And so far, the drop in Mexican stocks has not been tinged by scandal.That is not always the case. Two decades ago, during a wild bull market in Hong Kong that drew in a lot of foreign money, some enterprising people took advantage of the swell by printing and selling counterfeit share certificates. Brokerage back offices were so overwhelmed by heavy trading that it was some time before they noticed the counterfeits. Soon after, the market crashed, and everyone lost money, whether or not they had been snookered into buying a phony certificate.Just three years ago, a boom in India's stock market was fueled by phony bank certificates, which were traded like money. Profits vanished when the fraud was uncovered."There is always the risk of unexpected developments in any kind of investing," notes Barton Biggs, the chief international strategist for Morgan Stanley. "In international markets, the risks are compounded" because markets are not as open as the American market.Foreign markets are also complicated by differences in accounting standards around the world. Standards can be surprisingly lax even in some major countries like Britain, where Robert Maxwell carried out a massive fraud without his auditors noticing. And in some countries, there are no real audits at all. China had a brief stock market boom in 1993 despite a lack of reliable profit figures. And last year the Bank of China, a government-owned bank, sold $500 million of bonds to American investors. Although the bank's balance sheet looked good, it was not audited by any other accounting firm. Instead, the figures were certified by the bank's very own in-house accountants.So far, that loan has not been a disaster for the lenders. But the willingness of investors to overlook the lack of an outside accountant is a sign that greed has gotten the better of them. "There are," says James Grant, the editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer, "cycles of financial credulity just as sure as there are business cycles."In the 1920's, Mr. Grant recalls in "Money of the Mind," his book on financial history, Ivan Krueger, a Swedish financier who dominated the world's match industry -- that's right, the things you light candles with -- borrowed huge sums of money at extraordinarily high interest rates. Although he used the best investment bankers, no one noticed that his auditing firm, a predecessor of today's Ernst & Young, had not certified his accounts. (In fact, they refused to do so because they could not confirm the figures.)AdvertisementWhen Krueger's fraud was eventually exposed, the American investment bankers were blamed, even by Swedish investors. The investors said they had relied on the bankers to investigate Krueger. Max Winkler, a financial commentator of the time whose own warnings had been ignored, responded to those pleas by quoting, "Mundus vult decipi -- ergo decipiatur." The world wants to be deceived -- let it therefore be deceived.Before the current Mexican crisis, there were in fact some warnings sounded. Last spring, Gert von der Linde, the retired chief economist of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, predicted the devaluation of Mexican currency. But his words were all but ignored. Indeed, most big Wall Street firms were eagerly recommending, and selling, Mexican investments right up until the peso fell.Now American government officials say they saw the risks in Mexico and began warning Mexican officials as early as late summer. But they decided not to sound a warning here because they believed that it was important to support the Mexican Government and economy, particularly in the wake of the bruising ratification battle over the North American Free Trade Agreement.There is plenty of precedent here, as well. In the 1920's American investors were persuaded to lend huge sums of money to Germany to help with its reconstruction and with reparations payments after World War I. The bankers who arranged the loans by selling bonds feared that Germany would default, and so did the American Government, but they kept quiet and emphasized how America would benefit from the loans, through increased trade. The fears, of course, were prescient.Historically, the excesses of international markets have produced big profits and big losses, with the losses killing investors' enthusiasm for years or even decades. Now, President Clinton appears to be trying to avoid discouraging Americans from investing in Mexico.Many Wall Street strategists argue that if Congress fails to approve the loan guarantees to Mexico, it will be playing Russian roulette with the hemisphere's economy. They say that America's responsibility to the economy far outweighs any concern about unjustly enriching foolish investors, whose bad bets on Mexico will prove much less costly to them if the bailout is approved.That is an argument that grates on Mr. Grant, who thinks that the loan guarantees would be a bailout not of Mexico but of reckless investors. "This scheme has shown that Wall Street is not in favor of free markets," he said last week. "It is in favor of free bull markets. It is so much opposed to bear markets that it would like the Government to intervene to stop them."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 1995, on Page 4004003 of the National edition with the headline: The Nation; How Foreigners Invest, And Lose Their Shirts. 
A HAND FOR THE HUNGRYHelping Hands for the Homeless and Hungry, a Rye-based nonprofit organization, will benefit from the Winter in Rye Antiques Show, today from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Rye Middle School on Route 1.Sixty-five dealers will participate, and the admission of $4.50 will be reduced to $4 for anyone taking a can or box of food.Variety is the spice of this show. A sampling of the unusual merchandise includes Wallace Nutting prints, kerosene and other vintage lighting, oyster plates, 18th-century French armchairs, a pre-1820's museum-quality quilt, medical and dental items, black history items, vintage watches, English majolica sunflower plates, Victorian inlaid necktie presses, prison art, bird cages and writing boxes.In addition, there will be estate jewelry, linens and laces, bottles, rugs, toys, paintings, china and glass.AdvertisementYellow and black signs point the way to the school, off Exit 19 of Interstate 95. WHITHER WHITE PLAINS?A discussion of economic development in White Plains is to be held at a meeting of the Building Owners and Managers Association of Westchester on Thursday at 5:30 P.M. at the Crowne Plaza White Plains. The topic will be "Downtown Revitalization: A Catalyst for Economic Growth."Joseph R. Potenza, planning commissioner for White Plains and executive director of its Urban Renewal Agency, will talk about an updated comprehensive plan for the municipality. The plan includes improvement of the downtown shopping district and completion of the Central Urban Renewal Project.Offering a view from Stamford -- White Plains's retailing rival -- will be Sandra Goldstein, a director of the Stamford Downtown Consortium, the Chamber of Commerce and the Mayor's Multicultural Council and a former president of the Stamford Board of Legislators. Her subject will be how the redevelopment of Stamford's downtown was accomplished.The cocktail reception, dinner and two speeches cost $50. The number to call for reservations and information is 328-9703. AUSCHWITZ MEMORIESThe train ride to Auschwitz, how Joseph Mengele selected his victims and death marches are to be recalled in a talk by Livia Krancberg, a 76-year-old survivor of the concentration camp at Auschwitz.The program will be held tomorrow at 1:30 P.M. in Reisinger Auditorium of Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers.Ms. Krancberg's testimony is included in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's Archives and the Yale University Archives, among others, and she is participating in the oral history recording of "Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation," produced by Steven Spielberg.AdvertisementShe has lectured in many colleges and high schools in the New York City area and was honored by her community, Woodbridge, N.J., for her contributions to preserving Holocaust history.Her lecture is part of Sarah Lawrence's commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. Admission is free. For information and directions, the number is 395-2411. H-TWO-OH!Water, water is everywhere at the "Sea and Shore" exhibition opening today at the Hopper House Art Center in Nyack. The 10-artist invitational show will run through March 26.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Streams, rivers, oceans, ponds and lakes are depicted, "making visual the certainty that spring is just around the corner," said D. Robert Brebbia, the show's curator and one of the exhibiting artists. The other painters are Allan F. Avery, Janet F. Avery, Elwood G. Bengert, Beverly B. Colgan, James Harrington, Martha L. Heatley, Henri Jatho, Sally Spivack and Edward M. Warzala.The paintings are soothingly traditional, executed in watercolor, oils or acrylics.The center, at 82 North Broadway in Nyack, was once the boyhood home of the painter Edward Hopper.A reception will be held today from noon to 5 P.M. Regular hours thereafter are Fridays from 5 to 8 P.M. and Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 5 P.M. Admission is free, or by donation of $1. More information is available by calling 358-0774. SINGING OUTThe Boys Choir of Harlem, founded in 1968 as a small church group, has become a major musical institution with an infectious, irresistible style. Under the guidance of its director, Dr. Walter J. Turnbull, the choir has toured Europe, the United States and Asia, entertaining at the White House, the United Nations and in Manhattan's concert halls.The choir will appear in concert on Saturday at 7 P.M. in the Academic Arts Theater of Westchester Community College in Valhalla, performing a wide-ranging repertory of sacred music, gospel, ragtime, jazz and spirituals. Tickets at $15 and $10 for children and people 65 and older can be reserved by calling 785-6567.  MUSIC FOR YOUNGER SETJoanie Bartels's performances on Nickelodeon and the Disney Channel have earned the approval not only of young viewers but also of Parents magazine and Child magazine.AdvertisementShe will appear today at 1:30 P.M. at the Tarrytown Music Hall, 13 Main Street, in a concert of music that moves from Brahms to the Beatles, her own compositions, rock 'n' roll and Broadway show tunes. Singing and strumming her guitar, she puts on a choreographed show that appeals to many parents. Her audiocassette called "Lullaby" won a gold record.Tickets are $12 at the door. The number to call for information is 693-7898. THE CREATIVE CHILDThe College of New Rochelle will begin a five-week program for creative children from 4 to 12 years old on Saturday mornings. The sessions will last an hour and a half, and there will be two sessions each Saturday at 9 A.M. and 10:30 A.M., starting this week.Children will be divided into three age groups from pre-kindergarten through sixth grade, and they may choose from subjects like science, art, drama, architecture, computers and business. One five-week course costs $80, and children who sign up for both courses will be charged $140. Discounts are available for more than one child in a family.Dr. Susan Baum, assistant professor of education of gifted and talented children in the college's graduate school, developed the program, she said, because of "budget cuts in many Westchester schools that have done away with gifted and talented programs."The college is at 29 Castle Place in downtown New Rochelle. The information number is 654-5330. DO-IT-YOURSELFIf the extent of your home maintenance skills is limited to changing a light bulb, you might want to attend a series of three free workshops aimed at making you handier around the house and saving money on repair bills.Sol Berkowitz will conduct the workshops, sponsored by the Cornell Cooperative Extension of Westchester, at the downtown New Rochelle Public Library off North Avenue. "Leaky Faucets" will be the program this Wednesday from 2 to 4 P.M., followed by "Simple Home Repairs" on March 22 and "Lamp Repairs" on April 5. The registration number is 632-7878. ELEANOR CHARLESWe are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 1995, on Page WC13 of the National edition with the headline: WESTCHESTER GUIDE. 
A sampling of places to go and dance, throughout the city. Many have cover charges; call ahead.  THE BIG CLUBS  LIMELIGHT Sixth Avenue at 20th Street, (212) 807-7850. Tuesday to Sunday 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme/ music: Tuesday, alternative; Wednesday, half-gay, half-straight; Thursday through Saturday, house, techno; Sunday, rock & roll and live bands. Door policy: "Neat but casual, avoid ripped jeans, sneakers, gold chains, hoodlum-wear."  WEBSTER HALL 125 East 11th, (212) 353-1600. Wednesday to Saturday 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme/ music: Wednesday, runway parties -- "Walk down the runway and pretend you're a model"; Thursday, psychedelic night; Friday and Saturday, downtown rock and roll crowds; four different DJ's on four floors playing disco, rock, pop and reggae. Door policy: "Everyone gets in as long as they're not drunk or unruly." No torn jeans. PALLADIUM126 East 14th Street, (212) 473-7171. Thursday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-5 A.M. Music: House, hip/ hop and reggae. Door policy: No jeans, sneakers or gold chains.  THE TUNNEL 47 West 20th Street, (212) 695-7292. Thursday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme/music: Techno, house. Door policy: "Dress well enough to be out dancing with no big fat gold chains." THE ROXY 515 West 18th Street, (212) 645-5156. Tuesday, Wednesday, 8 P.M.-2 A.M.; closed Thursday and sometimes Friday; Saturday, 11 P.M.-4 A.M.; Sunday, 1:30 P.M.-6 P.M. Skate rental: $3.50 to $10, depending on the night. Theme: Tuesday and Wednesday, rollerskating and rollerblading; Saturday, gay night. Door policy: "Look for people who are trendy and wild."  SMALLER CLUBS  NELL'S 246 West 14th Street, (212) 675-1567. 10 P.M.-4 A.M, every night. CHINA CLUB 2130 Broadway, (212) 877-1166. 10 P.M.-4 P.M., every night. Music: current dance music, plus some live rock & roll. Door policy: "Regulars get in first."  THE BANK 225 East Houston, (212) 505-5033. Friday, Saturday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Theme: Friday, "The Realm," gothic, new wave, industrial; Saturday, "Exedor," alternative, danceable gothic.  205 205 Chrystie, (212) 473-5816.  Every night, 10:30-4 A.M.  Themes: Monday, "Concrete Jungle"; Tuesday, "Bingo Bango Etc."; Wednesday, funk; Thursday, guest DJs; Friday, Saturday, "S.O.A.P." (hiphop, gangster rap, dance music), Sunday, "Maroons."  REBAR 127 Eighth Avenue, (212) 627-1680. From 8 P.M.-4 P.M.; Sunday 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Themes: Tuesday, "Debalicious," house; Wednesday, "Snog," 80's music; Friday, Saturday, everything; Sunday, "Cafe de Paris," a musical timeline. BUDDHA BAR 150 Varick Street, (212) 255-4433. 9 P.M.-4 A.M. every night. Theme/music: Tuesdays are backgammon night; Sundays for ladies only. Wednesdays, hip-hop; Thursdays, progressive soul; Fridays, latin music, house, soul to nostalgic music.DON HILL'S 511 Greenwich Street at the corner of Spring Street, (212) 219-2850. Tuesday to Sunday, 10 P.M.-4 A.M. Music: Downtown. VELVET 600 West 26th Street, at Eleventh Avenue, (212) 675-9602 or 675-9607. Thursday and Friday, 11 P.M.; Saturday, 10 P.M. and Sunday, 8:30 P.M. Theme: Thursday, Tribe; Bliss on Fridays; Latin, house and classics on Saturday, and "Velvet Sundays," with disc jockeys.  Q-CLUB 93-37 150th Street, Jamaica, (718) 262-0733. Wednesday to Saturday, 10:30 P.M. to 5 A.M.  Theme: Caribbean music, reggae, disco, calypso and R&B. Wednesday is "Dance All Night"; Thursday, Hip Hop; Friday, Ladies Night; Saturday, varies. RIDDLERS 1860 Westchester Avenue, the Bronx. (718)822-9291. Mixed music. BENTLEY'S 7110 Third Avenue (between 71st and 72d Streets), Bay Ridge, (718) 745-0748. Till 4 A.M., everynight. Theme/music: Top 40 dance, disco, pop. Door policy: No men under 25, no women under 23.LEGENDS 639 Utica Avenue (between Winthrop and Clarkson Streets), Flatbush, Brooklyn. (718) 778-0500. 11 P.M.-4 A.M. Fridays and Saturdays. Theme/ music: Reggae, calypso, slow jam and house music. THE ARK , 135 East 22d Street, East Flatbush, Brooklyn. (718) 693-2168. Friday through Sunday, 10 P.M. to 4 A.M. Music: Friday night, reggae, R&B, house. Saturday, R&B, "oldies but goodies," and usually a live show. Sunday is Love Boat Reggae Sunday, i.e., reggae all night. Door policy: No men under 25, no women under 23. Saturday is "more mature." No jeans, no sneakers.  GAY  JACKIE 60 432 West 14th Street, (212) 677-6060. Tuesday only.  SOUND FACTORY 530 West 27th Street, (212) 643-0728. Saturday only, 1 A.M.-whenever, $20.  LESBIAN  GIRL BAR 15 St. Marks Place, (212) 674-7959. Usually Friday.  BARROOM 432 West 14th Street. Saturday.  AFTERHOURS  BERLIN 1 West 125th Street (downstairs), (718) 617-4783. Fridays only, midnight on. ROVING PARTIES  AQUA-BOOTY!  (212) 229-7777, monthly underground parties. KONCRETE JUNGLE (212) 604-4224. Next event will be held today at S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, (212) 243-4940.  10 P.M.-4 A.M. "Kings of the Jungle, Live and Direct from the U.K." LATIN  CLUB BROADWAY 2551 Broadway, between 95th and 96th Streets, (212) 864-7600. Friday, 9 P.M.-4 A.M., Saturday, 9 P.M.-5:30 A.M., Sunday, 8 P.M.-3 A.M. Music: Live Latino bands. Sundays are "Baile Mexicano."Door policy: "Bien vestido, no tenis, no jeans." CLUB BROADWAY 2 2700 Queens Plaza South (by 59th Street Bridge), Long Island City, (718) 937-7111.  Thursday, 6 P.M. to 3 A.M., Friday, Saturday and last Sunday of each month, 8 P.M. to 5 A.M. Theme/music: Salsa, salsa, salsa. Door policy: Well dressed. COPA CABANA 617 West 57th Street, (212) 582-2672. Tuesday, Friday, 6 P.M.-3 A.M.; Saturday, 10 P.M.-A.M. Door policy: Minimum age: 23 for women, 25 for men. "No jeans, no sneakers, no work boots, no T-shirts." S.O.B.'S 204 Varick Street (at Seventh Avenue), (212) 243-4940.   every night, opening and closing varies.Theme/music: Monday, Latin music; Tuesday, Soul Kitchen, classic R&B; Wednesday, variable; Thursday, 11 P.M., hiphop jazz; Friday, French-Caribbean dance party; Saturday, Brazilian dance party; Sunday, variable.  Dress code: "Casual."  BALLROOM/OLDIES  BOOK-FRIENDS CAFE 16 West 18th Street, (212) 255-7407.  Cover: $5.  Alternate Wednesdays, tea dance (traditional ballroom dancing with 30's flavor), 7-10 P.M.  Alternate Fridays, vintage dancing (pre-World War, includes workshop and demonstration), 8-10:30 P.M.  Dress code: "Civilized." ROSELAND 239 West 52d Street, (212) 247-0200. Call for information.  CHARISMA BALLROOM 71-46 Main Street, Flushing, (718) 268-2800. Call for information.  SWING  CONTINENTAL CLUB Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, Sunday night. Call New York Swing Dance Society, (212) NY-NYSDS.  WELLS RESTAURANT 2247 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, (212) 234-0700. Monday night.  METROPOLIS 31 Union Square (at 16th Street), (212) 455-0401, Tuesday. THE HUSTLE  HUSTLE HOTLINE 1-800-92-HUSTLE. (Places to go.)We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this list appears in print on February 12, 1995, on Page 13013011 of the National edition with the headline: Sampling: Where to Go. 
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown has traveled to Belgium, Spain, India and the Middle East in the last month, working to broker complicated deals on behalf of American businesses. But back at home, his new role as global rainmaker has been overshadowed by Justice Department and Congressional investigations into the complicated deals he set up when he was a private lawyer, a lobbyist and the Democratic Party chairman.Friends say he is being pilloried for the same kind of networking skills that led President Clinton to call him "the best Commerce Secretary we've ever had." Republicans counter that evidence is emerging of fast and loose practices that go beyond the wheeling and dealing that long ago earned Mr. Brown a reputation as someone who skirts the ethical line.Investigations now under way by the Justice Department, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Congressional Republicans have so far drawn only modest public attention, involving as they do a blizzard of numbing details.Mr. Brown's main Republican critic, Representative William F. Clinger of Pennsylvania, accused him today of violating Federal laws by filing inaccurate financial disclosure reports, illegally supplementing his Federal salary, engaging in potential conflicts of interest and providing inaccurate information to Congress.AdvertisementMr. Brown was in Spain today, trying to help American companies win contracts there, and could not be reached for comment. But as recently as Thursday he told a House panel that "there has been no improper activity, impropriety on my part."Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid Weingarten, expressed confidence that the Justice Department would not find any wrongdoing by his client. But even Mr. Brown's allies acknowledge he has failed to dispel the air of suspicion that surrounds his finances.Documents gathered from Mr. Brown's critics have allowed a fragmentary picture to emerge of his most lucrative single business relationship, a partnership with a Texas businesswoman named Nolanda Hill. Congressional investigators are focusing on these points, among others:*Ms. Hill's payment of about $400,000 to Mr. Brown for his stake in a small importing company, First International, in which he had invested no money and which apparently made no profits.*Payments from another company Ms. Hill owned, Corridor Broadcasting, to First International. Investigators think the payments may have been part of an effort to siphon money from Corridor before Federal agencies could seize its assets. Corridor had defaulted on almost $40 million in loans held by Government agencies.*The F.D.I.C.'s handling of Corridor's default, which cost taxpayers $23 million. A former chairman of the agency described its actions as unusually generous. The F.D.I.C.'s inspector general is investigating.*Other small companies partly or entirely owned by Mr. Brown that appeared to rely on his political connections. Among those companies is one he sold for more than $500,000 in 1993, Capital Pebsco, that marketed pension services to municipalities run by Democrats. Republicans have raised questions about up to $140,000 that the company paid Mr. Brown in brokerage fees in 1992 and about his decision not to disclose his stake in another business, Kellee Communications. They say Kellee's pay-phone operation contracts with AT&T posed a potential conflict of interest, because Mr. Brown had helped AT&T win telecommunications equipment contracts abroad.Ms. Hill has declined to comment, but her lawyer, George Terwilliger 3d, has said she did nothing wrong.Friends of Mr. Brown have suggested that criticisms of his First International profits are naive. In the real world, they say, companies are willing to pay for an association with a prominent and successful person. The Importer  Growing Clout And a ConnectionAdvertisementMr. Brown has been around prominent and successful people all of his life. As the son of a Harlem hotel manager, Mr. Brown grew up in a swirl of celebrities like Joe Louis and Louis Armstrong. He made his mark in Washington during the 1970's as a lawyer for the National Urban League, then worked briefly for Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts. He joined Patton Boggs, a powerful Washington law and lobbying firm, in 1981.It was after Mr. Brown became head of the Democratic National Committee in 1989 that he met Ms. Hill. Their business associates say that Mr. Brown's political clout provided the attraction for the business relationship that developed. "At that time, Ron Brown was a lawyer who was taking over the Democratic Party and seemed to have a very bright future," said Billy B. Hill, Ms. Hill's former husband and a Dallas lawyer.Ms. Hill gave Mr. Brown a free stake in First International when she set it up in 1990. Yet Mr. Brown's name was not enough. The company tried unsuccessfully to import oil from Angola and Saudi Arabia, hand-painted china and art posters from Poland and wine from Hungary.Mr. Brown has said he gave the company his financial acumen, judgment and insight. The only clear sign that First International ever tried to trade on the relationship after Mr. Brown became Commerce Secretary in January 1993 is a memorandum that Ms. Hill wrote on First International stationery in May 1993. In the memo, she sought Mr. Brown's help in arranging a meeting in Russia between Commerce Department officials and John B. Foster, another of her business partners.Mr. Brown has said that he had no recollection of ever receiving the memorandum and that no such meeting took place. But Mr. Clinger said today that among the potential conflicts of interest from Mr. Brown's business dealings, "that is certainly the one that jumps out at us."Even as deal after deal was falling through, First International was in no danger of collapse, thanks to help from Corridor, which covered many of its expenses and provided office space.Mr. Brown's role in First International was first revealed by The Washington Post in 1993, and he and his aides repeatedly denied last year that there was any connection between First International and Corridor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. Clinger disclosed last month that First International's main source of income was a promissory note from Corridor Broadcasting that paid at least $600,000 over the last four years.Mr. Brown now says Ms. Hill never told him of the note.Several mysteries surround the promissory note. One is why Corridor continued to pay interest on it even though it had stopped paying interest in 1988 on the loan held by the F.D.I.C. Another mystery is the steep interest rate: 16.4 percent. The Broadcaster  The Aftermath Of Unpaid LoansAdvertisementBorn in Texas, Corridor Broadcasting bought ultra-high-frequency television stations in Washington and Boston in 1985 with more than $30 million in loans from high-flying Texas savings associations like Sunbelt Savings. Within three years, it was unable to make interest payments on the loans. When its lenders all failed and were taken over during the next several years by the F.D.I.C. or another Federal agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, the collection of the debts became the Federal Government's problem.The trust corporation wrote off several loans to Corridor totaling more than $13 million as total losses. The F.D.I.C. inspector general is now looking into the F.D.I.C.'s handling of the biggest debt, a $26.3 million loan.The F.D.I.C. auctioned the loan in 1993 for just $3 million. The buyer was the Jasas Corporation, owned by two of Ms. Hill's business associates, Mr. Foster and his wife, Barbara Foster. The Fosters foreclosed on the loan, seized both of Corridor's television stations and hired Ms. Hill to run them. Congressional investigators have questioned whether the auction was fair because Ms. Hill had negotiated with the Fosters a year earlier about buying Corridor itself.By the F.D.I.C.'s own account, other bidders had limited access to Corridor's books. That gave an advantage to Ms. Hill's business associates, who knew a lot about Corridor's finances. L. William Seidman, the F.D.I.C.'s chairman in the late 1980's, called that unusual."One would have to suspect someone was getting an inside opportunity," he said. "If I had been around and that information had been given to me, I would have had the inspector general take a fast look at it."F.D.I.C. investigators are also trying to determine if money was improperly drained from Corridor before its collapse. Corridor did a lot of business with Ms. Hill's other companies. Corridor also made payments to two companies in which Mr. Brown owned stakes, First International and Harmon International, which leased equipment to Corridor's Washington television station.Corridor employed Mr. Brown's daughter-in-law, Tamara Brown, and paid $2,000 a month for six months to his daughter, Tracy Brown, to provide a mailing address, answering machine and fax machine in New York. Corridor also paid a $15,000 investment banking fee, later returned, to one of Mr. Brown's longtime friends, James Hackney, who is now the Commerce Department counselor.In addition, the company contributed $63,825 to the Democratic Party in 1991 and 1992, even as it was telling the F.D.I.C. that it had no money for interest payments.AdvertisementCorridor also made a videotape of Mr. Brown that was shown at the Democratic National Convention. But Federal Election Commission documents show that the $75,000 the Democratic National Committee paid for it went to another of Ms. Hill's companies, Columbia Productions.The Commerce Department drafts Administration positions on telecommunications issues that could affect Corridor, but there is no evidence that any such positions have been taken in this Administration. The Sale  A Three-Part Deal Yields QuestionsThe roughly $400,000 that Mr. Brown collected for his stake in First International came not in a single check but in a complex three-part transaction.Mr. Clinger expressed open disbelief today about one of those parts, the payment of $135,000 by a limited partnership apparently spun off from First International. Noting that the money was paid in quarterly installments on consecutive checks well before Mr. Brown sold his stake, Mr. Clinger said today that this represented inappropriate income for a Federal official and should have been reported separately on Mr. Brown's Federal financial disclosure forms.Mr. Brown never mentioned the partnership on his financial disclosure forms and has given no explanation other than that the money was made part of the sale once the sale was arranged.Ms. Hill also repaid $190,000 of Mr. Brown's personal and legal debts, using a go-between, a Boston lawyer named Harry Barnett. Some of the money came from Jasas Corporation and was passed through a third company's account, although the Fosters have said they were unaware of the transaction.Finally, Ms. Hill forgave the $72,000 balance of a debt that Mr. Brown owed to another of her companies, Know Inc. Mr. Brown had originally borrowed the money from a Washington bank that later failed and was taken over by the F.D.I.C.A Connecticut businessman, acting at the suggestion of Billy Hill, bought the debt from the F.D.I.C. in 1991 with Mr. Brown's permission and then transferred it to Ms. Hill in a debt swap. F.D.I.C. officials have described the transaction as unusual because loans of less than $100,000 are usually sold only in large bundles.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 1995, on Page A00001 of the National edition with the headline: Web of Business Connections Haunts Commerce Secretary. 
ABOUT 20 YEARS AGO, WHILE answering an intrusive telephone poll, I stumbled on a bit of legal philosophy that could serve the planet for at least a century. I am assuming (a) that the 21st will be the Information Century, (b) that there will be no World War III to distract humanity from its lust for trade and profit and (c) that post-Marxist China will by then have stopped selling goods based on copyright theft.That telephone pollster called, naturally, in the middle of dinner. He asked what kind of car I dreamed of owning next. Fortunately, I was annoyed."Do you get paid for asking that?""Yes, sir.""Well, then, how much will I get for my answer?""Why nothing, sir. We have selected you so that we can learn how to serve you better."With no thought at all, I heard myself inventing a doctrine that I have smugly invoked ever since: "No pay, no say."AdvertisementKnowing that my answers would be sold not only to the inquiring auto maker but also to rafflemongers, credit-card usurers, catalogue peddlers and countless junk mailers, I decided that information about me, like anything created by me, is valuable property. You want it for your business, let's deal.Alas, the good people who conduct The New York Times's political polls may deplore my attitude. They believe, as I do, that polling serves democracy -- and that we should never pollute the news by paying for it. If too many people were to take my advice and withhold their opinions, the voter samples would be hopelessly distorted. Then again, if in a few years we will all be routinely sending opinions to Washington by E-mail, polls will have been overtaken and democracy rendered unrecognizable.So for the moment I cling to my principle: In the Age of Information, Information Is Property. Let the lawyers work out the details.I WAS REMINDED OF MY SIMPLISTIC DOCTRINE at a recent conference on "Intellectual Property Rights and the Arts: The Impact of New Technologies." An impressive roster of performers, producers, writers, publishers, curators and lawyers had been assembled by Martin E. Segal, the chairman of the New York International Festival of the Arts, to confront the growing fear that computers are upsetting relationships among the creators, purveyors and consumers of art and ideas. As Hal David, the lyricist ("Promises, Promises"), put it, creative people these days are feeling like "road kill on the information superhighway" -- helpless to prevent the infinite replication of their words, pictures and songs.Presenters and publishers, on the other hand, are afraid that a "tollbooth" royalty for each and every Internet replication will impede the progress of technology. They cite evidence that the evolution of computers depends on their carrying ideas and images that people will want and want to copy -- and that making copies is an essential attribute of computers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Indeed, it has already become very difficult to stop unethical copying in cyberspace. As Junda Woo and Jared Sandberg reported in the fall in The Wall Street Journal, even the muscular Walt Disney Company has been unable to prevent the circulation on the Internet of "troves of drawings of Disney characters as well as full-color scenes from Disney animated movies, including 'Aladdin' and 'Beauty and the Beast' " -- some of them disfigured, some even disrobed. "At a push of a keyboard button," the reporters noted, "anyone can copy drawings, computer games, photographs of supermodels, film stills, song snippets and newspaper articles. With another push of a button, copies can be sent to a vast audience without the original copyright owner ever getting wind of it, much less a royalty."Not invited to Segal's conference, but noisily scoffing into the ether, were the infomaniacs who bombard the Internet and hot magazines like Wired with declarations of war against the copyright establishment. They are touting "artists of appropriation," who claim a right to embellish the words, images and sounds of others in the spirit of "collage." One of their prophets has predicted the collapse of the entire art industry: "Digital art is the apotheosis of art in the age of mechanical reproduction. The very distinction between original and copy becomes meaningless in a digital world -- there the work exists only as a copy." Net surfers unite! You have nothing to lose but your editors, distributors and brokers!WE ARE HURTLING INTO A LEGAL VOID. I can say "No pay, no say" to a pollster, but I have no clear legal right to stop the phone company from selling my name and address to merchandisers. How then will I stop computers from routinely merging and merchandising my medical and credit records? How will I stop them from reproducing my picture or picturing me in fictional settings? How will I ever be paid for my writing if it is endlessly copied and altered in cyberspace?I am sure that the same technologies that threaten privacy and creative rights could in time be harnessed to help protect them. Computers could be taught to encode Internet words and images, to record their migrations and usurpations, even to bill for their use. But as Anne Wells Branscomb wrote last year in a wide-ranging study ("Who Owns Information: From Privacy to Public Access"), our concepts of information rights are rooted in the 18th century. They won't do in the 21st. The principles underlying the First Amendment and our copyright, patent and privacy laws no longer suffice to define which information deserves to be private property -- and when it should be sacrificed to social or technological priorities.AdvertisementShe offers hundreds of examples of new difficulties in information law and ethics. Consider, she asks, the value to patients and doctors of compiling uniform medical data -- but then consider the danger, for each, as others inevitably gain access to the data. Or consider what will happen when the names and addresses, ages and Social Security numbers that we routinely disclose are linked by unseen hands with computer records of our movie rentals, shopping habits and investments.Branscomb concludes that the courts and Congress will have to learn to treat information "as an asset with legal attributes, not unlike real estate or personal possessions." Not until even the plainest information -- your name, address and phone number -- is philosophically recognized as valuable property will government be able to write new laws to protect it against misappropriation, to govern its commercial reproduction and to specify when society may claim it for the common good. It's her sophisticated version of "No pay, no say.""We spend billions of dollars on the machines that make it possible to access information and billions upon billions to gather, manipulate, distribute and archive information," Branscomb writes, "but we spend little on understanding the economics of information, less on developing a law of information and perhaps only a little more on worrying about the ethics of information."In other words, let's not forget to invest also in law and ethics, because where there's pay, we'll find a way. I accept the amendment.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 1995, on Page 6006026 of the National edition with the headline: WORD & IMAGE; Cyberights.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

THE names were threaded through Gov. George E. Pataki's State of the State Message yesterday, the women in his government. He just mentioned their names and titles, said no more, but the message was not lost on his listeners, especially his Democratic listeners. "Look at all those women," a Democratic stalwart, who shall remain nameless at her request, fairly screeched into the telephone. "In real jobs. Look at that. Do you believe it?"Mr. Pataki has indeed appointed a lot of women to prominent positions in his new administration -- most of them substantial jobs, not token ones or "women's" jobs. The budget director is a woman. The Health Commissioner is a woman. So is the Parks Commissioner, the communications director and the Social Services Commissioner. And of course Mr. Pataki's running mate, Elizabeth P. McCaughey, is now the Lieutenant Governor and designated Medicaid expert.That is, by any measure, a large number of women, even slightly more than Gov. Mario M. Cuomo named to substantial jobs in his government at any one time. Maybe this should not come as a surprise. Mr. Pataki may be a committed feminist. It would have been hard to know that, though, because his campaign was so controlled that New Yorkers learned his views on few issues, except tax cutting and government shrinking.It is a bit counterintuitive because the Democratic Party takes a rather proprietary interest in the women's movement, while Republicans sometimes sound hostile, letting their talk-show champions use words like "femi-Nazis" with impunity and suggesting that feminism and "family values" are warring concepts.AdvertisementOF course, many Republicans favor the advancement of women; it was Ronald Reagan who named the first woman to the Supreme Court, Sandra Day O'Connor. But Democrats did take the lead in advancing opportunities for women, and here comes Mr. Pataki with his many appointments, and he is not the only one. It is as if the Democrats not only had Congress and a few statehouses taken away from them, but the potent issue of feminism, too. What happened?Mr. Pataki's communications director, Zenia Mucha, did not respond to requests to discuss her boss's appointment philosophy. Ms. McCaughey, the Lieutenant Governor, says that, "As a very smart leader, George wants the best possible people working with him." Politics did not motivate him, she suggested.Others guess otherwise."Part of it is a very strategic decision to give visibility to women that may pay off at the polls," said Harriett Woods, president of the National Women's Political Caucus. "That's fine with me. Great. I don't care. Whatever works. I guess what I'm saying is, in some strange way, it's sort of like Nixon opening up China. The Republicans may be more aggressive about bringing women in because that's not a constituency they've had, while Democrats have taken it for granted."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another issue is timing. "Some of what we're seeing is generational," suggested Susan Estrich, a professor of law and political science at the University of Southern California, who ran Michael Dukakis's presidential campaign. "George Pataki is 49. He went to college with smart women, he's grown up around smart women, he's used to being around smart women."AND there are more competent women in jobs outside the home. As Mr. Pataki is about to learn on other matters, change tends to be incremental in government, not revolutionary. The women's movement has been around for a generation, and at the same time, the economy pushed many women, feminists and nonfeminists, into jobs outside the home. Some have succeeded in government jobs, in Democratic and Republican administrations.In other words, the most fundamental objective of the women's movement -- opening up opportunities to women -- must be working. Otherwise, how could Mr. Pataki, Gov. Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey and Gov. John M. Engler of Michigan, among others, find accomplished women to appoint?"It proves how mainstream we've been all along in advocating that competent women should share the policy making in appointive as well as elective office," said Ms. Woods. "That is clearly not a very radical position when Republicans of all stripes are appointing women. It's a validation that there should be a level playing field."It is also validation that politics works. "Nobody in politics is unaware that women vote, vote in very large numbers, and sometimes vote somewhat differently from men," said Ruth B. Mandel, longtime director of the Center for the American Woman and Politics at Rutgers University. "Politically it has become a matter of good practice and politics to include women in an administration."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 1995, on Page B00006 of the National edition with the headline: METRO MATTERS; Non-Token Appointees Mark Women's Advance. 
Fifty years after the B-29 Superfortress Enola Gay was used to drop an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, the decision that ushered in the nuclear age is still the subject of fierce historical debate.The issue stirs enormous passions: at one pole speculative estimates of how many Americans would have died invading Japan, and were presumably spared because of the bombing, and at the other pole whether the attack in August 1945 was necessary to end the war.Indeed, some historians now contend that the bombing was aimed not so much at the wartime enemy Japan as at the wartime ally Soviet Union, delivered as a warning against postwar rivalry.The questions, sometimes raised by a new generation horrified at the death and destruction that rained on Hiroshima and, three days later, on Nagasaki, resonate harshly among World War II veterans, particularly those who survived the bloody fighting in the Pacific that took more than 41,000 American lives.AdvertisementIn the latest clash, the Smithsonian Institution, attacked by veterans groups and members of Congress for a World War II exhibit that they said was overly solicitous of Japan, has decided to drastically scale back the display: The narrative, already revised five times, will be dropped, and visitors will see only part of the Enola Gay's fuselage, along with a small commemorative plaque.Among historians digging through musty diaries, military records and memorandums from President Truman's Administration, opinions about the bombing of Hiroshima are no less firm than the veterans'."I think it can be proven that the bomb was not only unnecessary but known in advance not to be necessary," said Gar Alperovitz, a historian critical of the decision to drop the bomb and who has been studying the issue for some 30 years. Speaking in a telephone interview from Washington, he said, "The President fully understood and was advised that there were other ways to end the war." Mr. Alperovitz said he was planning to publish an extensive study on the subject this summer.By contrast, Robert Cowley, the editor of the Military History Quarterly, whose forthcoming spring issue is devoted to "The End of the War With Japan," said: "If you were in Truman's shoes and had this weapon and had the chance to end the war then and there, there's no question you would use the bomb. The problems of continuing the war were enormous."Barton J. Bernstein, a Stanford University historian who has figured in the Smithsonian uproar, said in a telephone interview that the bombing should be examined in the context of its time. Professor Bernstein said he was wary both of revisionist historians and the veterans.Many questions raised now, Professor Bernstein writes in the current issue of Foreign Affairs, "often fail to recognize that, before Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the use of the A-bomb did not raise profound moral issues for policymakers."He explained: "By early 1945, World War II -- especially in the Pacific -- had become virtually total war. The firebombing of Dresden  [ Germany ]  had helped set a precedent for the U.S. air force, supported by the American people, to intentionally kill mass numbers of Japanese citizens. The earlier moral insistence on noncombatant immunity crumbled during the savage war."Professor Bernstein helped ignite the latest furor when he convinced Smithsonian officials that casualty estimates for an invasion of Japan should be about 63,000, not the previous estimates of at least 229,000.AdvertisementThe question of projected casualties, Professor Bernstein said in an interview, "is so important to the vets" because any lessening of these numbers could be interpreted as raising questions about the need for the bombing and, in a sense, diminishing their own role.Casualty estimates have run as high as the half million cited in Truman's memoirs and the one million referred to by Winston Churchill.  These figures were often taken by the public to mean that these many lives had been saved. But Professor Bernstein and other historians note that the term casualties includes wounded as well as dead.They also note that these postwar estimates appear to be far higher than the figures that military planners were using at the time. Historians caution that all the figures, even those at the time, were speculative.Professor Bernstein said that he revised his casualty estimates last spring, after rereading the diary of Adm. William Leahy, the equivalent of the Chairman of the joint Chiefs of Staff at the end of World War II.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Admiral Leahy, he said, recounted how an estimate was advanced at a White House meeting of President Truman and his military advisers on June 18, 1945. Participants discussed a casualty figure of 35 percent.Professor Bernstein said the Army commander, Gen. George C. Marshall, had cited a 35 percent casualty figure for the entire invasion force, about 775,000 troops. But Professor Bernstein said his review of Admiral Leahy's diary indicated that the figure should have been applied only to combat troops, or about 190,000 men. The new calculation yielded 63,000 casualties.He conceded, however, that the 35 percent figure was made before American intelligence found indications of a large Japanese buildup in the Kyushu region, where an invasion was tentatively planned for the fall of 1945, which presumably would have meant more casualties.Truman and his advisers, who as veterans of World War I had their own memories of casualties, had seen troops devastated in Europe, and they knew that much of the Pacific battles were even tougher."Considering the horrific fighting on Iwo Jima and Okinawa, the prospect of invading Japan itself seemed nightmarish," Peter Maslowski, a professor at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, writes in the forthcoming Military History Quarterly.AdvertisementProfessor Maslowski outlines four possible options for President Truman, each with "weaknesses and potential risks." These were the bombing, an invasion, a negotiated settlement (which would presumably hinge on the politically difficult question of allowing the Emperor, revered as a God by the Japanese, to remain in some position of authority), and strangulation through both intensified conventional bombing and a tightened blockade."Looking back on the events of 1945 from a secure, peaceful, comfortable perch decades later, it is easy to criticize President Truman's decision to drop the atomic bombs," Professor Maslowski writes. "But considering the possible drawbacks associated with the other options, his choice was entirely logical and reasonable -- the least undesirable of four unhappy alternatives."Mr. Alperovitz disagrees. He contends that the Soviet Union's decision in July 1945 to join the war against Japan was expected by Mr. Truman to spell the end of the war, and that the Americans were already aware of peace overtures.Instead, he contends, American policy shifted, largely under the influence of Truman's old Congressional mentor James Byrnes, the Secretary of State, who wanted to block the Soviets from moving into northern China and to deliver a warning for the future.Mr. Cowley, the editor of the Military History Quarterly, agreed that the challenge to the Soviet Union was important, saying that if the Soviets had moved into the area "this would have changed the geopolitical ball game; Tokyo would become an oriental Berlin."Professor Bernstein also said that the Soviet gambit had figured in Truman's decision to use the bomb. So did the momentum of the $2 billion Manhattan Project, he said. Had the bomb been ready in time, he believes, it would have been used on Nazi Germany.Mr. Alperovitz and Professor Bernstein note that many of the generals, raised with a nobler notion of war, had worried about the implications of using the bomb. Admiral Leahy called it "barbaric."But these warriors' qualms were swept away in what Professor Bernstein called a "redefinition of morality that made Hiroshima and Nagasaki possible and ushered in the Atomic Age in such a frightening way.""That redefinition of morality was a product of World War II," Professor Bernstein writes, "which included such barbarities as Germany's systematic murder of six million Jews and Japan's rape of Nanking.  "While the worst atrocities were perpetrated by the Axis, all the major nation-states sliced away at the moral code -- often to the applause of their leaders and citizens alike. By 1945 there were few moral restraints left in what had become virtually a total war."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 1995, on Page A00016 of the National edition with the headline: Hiroshima: A Controversy That Refuses to Die. 
This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue of December 1994 and suggests only high points in the main fields of reader interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings. Biographies and memoirs of people known for their contributions in fields other than literature and history are listed in appropriate categories. Art, Music & Popular CultureTHE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800. By Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M. Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color illustrations and other useful graphics.LES DEMOISELLES D'AVI GNON. By William Rubin, Helene Secket and Judith Cousins. (Museum of Modern Art/ Abrams, $40.) A jargon-free study of Picasso's masterpiece, the starting point for 20th-century art.NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the Bicentennial. By Robert A. M. Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman. (Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that examines the city's development as the world capital of finance and art, and the disputes and decisions that directed it; with extensive local descriptions.AdvertisementTHE RANSOM OF RUSSIAN ART. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) The story of a Maryland economics professor who amassed the world's largest collection of artworks by nonconformist Soviet artists.REVELATIONS: The Autobiography of Alvin Ailey. By Alvin Ailey with A. Peter Bailey. (Birch Lane/Carol, $18.95.) Completed from tapes made before the choreographer's death, this frustratingly allusive memoir suggests the sources for Ail ey's dances.THE ROMANTIC GENERATION. By Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849. Mr. Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.SEEING THE UNSEEN: Dr. Harold E. Edgerton and the Wonders of Strobe Alley. Edited by Roger R. Bruce. (George Eastman House/MIT, $39.95.) Edgerton's amazing work in high-speed photography; a CD-ROM comes with it.SHAKER BUILT: The Form and Function of Shaker Architecture. By Paul Rocheleau and June Sprigg, edited and designed by David Larkin. (David Larkin/ Monacelli Press/Penguin, $50.) Sumptuous color photographs of Shaker buildings, taken with care and devotion.WHISTLER AND MONTESQUIOU: The Butterfly and the Bat. By Edgar Munhall. (Frick Collection/Flammarion/Abbeville, $45.) A profusely illustrated biographical account of the encounter between the eccentric American painter and the foppish French nobleman that resulted in one of Whistler's masterpieces.Biography, Autobiography & MemoirANAIS NIN: A Biography. By Deirdre Bair. (Putnam, $39.95.) An engaging account that presents the diarist as even more self-absorbed than her work suggests.ANNA AKHMATOVA: Poet and Prophet. By Roberta Reeder. (St. Martin's, $35.) An ambitious effort to synthesize the facts of the life and works of one of Russia's greatest poets.AdvertisementBATTLING FOR PEACE: A Memoir. By Shimon Peres. (Random House, $25.) The Israeli politican and leader reviews his long career, which parallels the history of the nation.BEATRIX: The Gardening Life of Beatrix Jones Farrand, 1872-1959. By Jane Brown. (Viking, $50.) A lavishly illustrated account of how a niece of Edith Wharton became a great garden designer.CAITLIN: The Life of Caitlin Thomas. By Paul Ferris. (Pimlico/Trafalgar Square, paper, $16.95.) A biographer of Dylan Thomas now succeeds in bringing to tempestous life a portrait of the poet's wife.CHARLOTTE BRONTE: A Passionate Life. By Lyndall Gordon. (Norton, $27.50.) An engaging biography that connects the life and fiction persuasively, in particular the relationship between Bronte and her publisher that gave rise to "Villette," her other masterpiece.CLOSEST COMPANION: The Unknown Story of the Intimate Friendship Between Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley. Edited by Geoffrey C. Ward. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Margaret Suckley's diary shows F.D.R. finding comfort in a distant cousin who could relax, however worshipfully, in his presence.CONFESSIONS OF A BARBARIAN: Selections From the Journals of Edward Abbey, 1951-1989. Edited by David Petersen. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A selection from the notebooks and journals of the novelist and naturalist show his lifelong focus on his familiar themes: anarchy, sex, defense of the natural world and how best to die.THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL: The Definitive Edition. By Anne Frank. Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) An expanded version, restoring entries from the original diary, gives more texture and nuance to this renowned personal account of the Holocaust.DR. SEUSS & MR. GEISEL: A Biography. By Judith Morgan and Neil Morgan. (Random House, $25.) The authorized biography of the beloved children's author who gave the world the Cat in the Hat.AdvertisementDOSTOEVSKY: The Miraculous Years, 1865-1871. By Joseph Frank. (Princeton University, $35.) Volume 4 of this planned five-part biography excels in providing a cultural, literary, social and biographical context for Dostoyevsky's works.DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America. By Carolyn See. (Random House, $23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and zany freedom in California.EDMUND WILSON: A Biography. By Jeffrey Meyers. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $35.) Lively, shapely and evocative, this book offers insights into Wilson's public and private lives that Wilson, despite his own autobiographical writings, lacked the introspection to achieve.EVELYN WAUGH: A Biography. By Selina Hastings. (Houghton Mifflin, $40.) A readable one-volume life of the English satirist who was famous as a splendid stylist and a monstrous man.FRANCO: A Biography. By Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge, all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd, lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.GENIUS IN DISGUISE: Harold Ross of The New Yorker. By Thomas Kunkel. (Random House, $25.) Forty-four years after Ross's death, this first full-scale biography of the creator of The New Yorker tries to account for the formidable editorial instincts, integrity and self-knowledge that underlay his success.GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles. By Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.GIVING AWAY SIMONE: A Memoir. By Jan L. Waldron. (Times Books/Random House, $22.) An absorbing personal history of the author and her family, women who for five generations failed or declined to keep their children.AdvertisementHARDY. By Martin Seymour-Smith. (St. Martin's, $35.) An enjoyably pugnacious biography of the English novelist and poet that does not suffer previous biographies gladly.HARRY AND TEDDY: The Turbulent Relationship of Press Lord Henry R. Luce and His Favorite Reporter, Theodore H. White. By Thomas Griffith. (Random House, $24.) An affectionate but unsentimental dual biography of the founder of Time magazine and of one of its legendary correspondents, written by a former editor at Time.IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery. By Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.JOHN STEINBECK: A Biography. By Jay Parini. (Holt, $30.) A clearly written and sympathetic biography of the author of "The Grapes of Wrath" that argues for a critical re-evaluation of Steinbeck.THE LAST GREAT FRENCHMAN: A Life of General de Gaulle. By Charles Williams. (Wiley, $30.) The career of the much-taller-than-life soldier whose political victories were based on a loathing for politicians and a willingness to chuck his allies when he thought they were wrong.THE LIFE OF GRAHAM GREENE. Volume 2: 1939-1955. By Norman Sherry. (Viking, $34.95.) Mr. Sherry brings to the grotesquely complicated life of Greene a relentless passion for detail, resulting in a compulsively readable account.LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela. By Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) On the evidence of his own version of his amazing life, the President of South Africa is no moralist or messiah but a pragmatic politician who always chose what might work over what was ideologically agreeable.MOZART: A Life. By Maynard Solomon. (HarperCollins, $35.) A psychologically informed and often brilliant analysis of Mozart (and his father) that complicates rather than simplifies our understanding of Mozart. As it should.AdvertisementMURDERERS AND OTHER FRIENDS: Another Part of Life. By John Mortimer. (Viking, $23.95.) The creator of Horace Rumpole continues the recollections begun in "Clinging to the Wreckage" in a tone that will be familiar to viewers of "Mystery!"NELSON: A Personal History. By Christopher Hibbert. (Addison-Wesley, $30.) A biography that visits many familiar scenes but brings clarity, reliability, convincing judgments and enthusiasm to Horatio Nelson, a unique British hero whose personal defects could never tarnish his glory.1920 DIARY. By Isaac Babel. (Yale University, $20.) The first English translation of a journal kept by the great Russian short-story writer during his service as a correspondent in the campaign against the Poles.OUT OF EGYPT: A Memoir. By Andre Aciman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) A splendid rendition of life over 50 years or so in the prosperous business class in Alexandria, ending with the expulsion of the author's Jewish family.PAULA. by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Chilean novelist's account of three generations of her family's history, interwoven with an account of her daughter's yearlong coma that ended in the young woman's death.ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography. By Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.SAINT-EXUPERY: A Biography. By Stacy Schiff. (Knopf, $30.) A comprehensive biography of the French aviator and author of "The Little Prince."SLY AND ABLE: A Political Biography of James F. Byrnes. By David Robertson. (Norton, $29.95.) A life of the powerful politician who at various times was a United States Senator, Supreme Court Justice and Secretary of State.AdvertisementTOM PAINE: A Political Life. By John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character, an effective propagandist of revolution (and, on the whole, liberty) in America, France and even England.TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life. By Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat, incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.WALTER PATER: Lover of Strange Souls. By Denis Donoghue. (Knopf, $27.50.) A critical analysis of the life and work of the high priest of Victorian es theticism in which Mr. Donoghue argues that Pater is the fountainhead of modernism.WALT WHITMAN'S AMERICA: A Cultural Biography. By David S. Reynolds. (Knopf, $35.) An intensive historical excavation, aiming to show how Whitman, an enthusiast for almost everything, transmuted into his poetry images from all aspects of American culture.ZOLA: A Life. By Frederick Brown. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $37.50.) A comprehensive biography, making use of Zola's recently published complete correspondence, that dispels misconceptions about the writer's life and politics. CrimeTHE BOOKMAN'S WAKE. By John Dunning. (Scribner, $21.) A luxuriantly written mystery about a limited edition of "The Raven" whose owners have the disconcerting habit of winding up dead.CRANKS AND SHADOWS. By K. C. Constantine. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95.) In this 11th novel of a series, the "generally crazy" but compassionate police chief of a dying Pennsylvania steel town is told to shrink his already tiny force at the same time a paramilitary group shows up.DEAD LAGOON. By Michael Dibdin. (Pantheon, $21.) In the fifth Aurelio Zen novel, the ministry officer returns to his native Venice to investigate the kidnapping of an American businessman and discovers a city stagnating between economic depression and incipient fascism.AdvertisementTHE EDGE OF THE CRAZIES. By Jamie Harrison. (Hyperion, $20.95.) The eccentric inhabitants and festering animosities of a small town in Montana result in murder in this debut novel, told in a brash, animated voice.MURDER ON A KIBBUTZ. By Batya Gur. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspector Michael Ohayon faces a dual mystery when he attempts to understand the arcane ways of an Israeli kibbutz in order to catch the murderer of its administrative secretary.NO NIGHT IS TOO LONG. By Ruth Rendell writing as Barbara Vine. (Harmony, $23.) A psychological thriller in which a murderer thinks he is being pursued by the ghost of his victim.ORIGINAL SIN. By P. D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh investigates a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.PIGTOWN. By William J. Caunitz. (Crown, $23.) In a savvy police procedural, the investigation of the killing of a lowly foot soldier in the Brooklyn mob leads to the exposure of police corruption and the beginning of gangland war.STILL WATERS. By Margaret Woodward. (Putnam, $22.95.) A sensationalistic story is told with a delicate style in this debut novel about the murder of a rich socialite and her daughter in Mobile, Ala. Essays, Criticism & LettersANNOYING THE VICTORIANS. by James R. Kincaid. (Routledge, cloth, $49.95, paper, $15.95.) A series of essays that take a fresh and often irreverant view of Victorian literature.BETWEEN FRIENDS: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy, 1949-1975. Edited by Carol Brightman. (Harcourt Brace, $34.95.) The 26-year correspondence of two extraordinarily bright, active, articulate women who thought a lot and gossiped no little.AdvertisementTHE GUTENBERG ELEGIES: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age. By Sven Birkerts. (Faber & Faber, $22.95.) A meditation by the literary critic on the danger of extinction for books and the bookish as the world goes CD-ROM.JACK KEROUAC: SELECTED LETTERS, 1940-1956. Edited by Ann Charters. (Viking, $29.95.) The first of two projected volumes of the correspondence of the Beat chronicler.MODERN JAPANESE DIARIES: The Japanese at Home and Abroad as Revealed Through Their Diaries. By Donald Keane. (Holt, $50.) A collection of essays by the great scholar of Japan that paints of picture of the country's history from the mid-19th century to the 1920's.THE PORTABLE JACK KEROUAC. Edited by Ann Charters. (Viking, $27.95.) An anthology by a lifelong scholar of the Beats that shows the autobiographical unity of Kerouac's writings.SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and More. By Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of children. FictionTHE ADVENTURES OF MAQROLL: Four Novellas. By Alvaro Mutis. (HarperCollins, $24.) Brilliant stuff from a Colombian writer, the second volume of interrelated, outrageous tales from the life and times of Maqroll, a mysterious, mythic seafarer.THE AGE OF CONSENT. By Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) In Mr. Wolff's sixth novel Teddy Jenks, a 13-year-old child of the children of the 1960's, is transformed by his sister's near suicide into the historian of his family's emotional life.ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS: The Collected Stories of William Maxwell. (Knopf, $25.) Stories, balanced, gentle and humane, concerned above all with reconciliation, from six decades of work by a master writer and editor who is now 86.AdvertisementANGEL ANGEL. By April Stevens. (Viking, $19.95.) A strangely persuasive novel about a family petrified by a father's desertion, then restored to humanity by an ebullient young woman with enough excess mental health to go around.ANTARCTIC NAVIGATION. By Elizabeth Arthur. (Knopf, $25.) A first-person novel, alive with feeling and animated energy, whose heroine's aim is to vindicate by imitation the vision and morals of Scott of the Antarctic.ATHENA. By John Banville. (Knopf, $22.) In this wickedly mannerist novel, a murderer turned "art expert" runs smack into his own past when he has to catalogue a batch of stolen Old Masters.BETRAYALS. By Charles Palliser. (Ballantine, $23.) This clever novel spins out a set of variations on the double-cross and such related themes as infidelity, treason and revenge.THE BLUE AFTERNOON. By William Boyd. (Knopf, $23.) A story of amoral obsessive love in the Philippines at the turn of the century, told with the author's characteristic vigor and inventiveness.COLD SNAP: Stories. By Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection of short stories that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the biological trap called life.THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very recently produced America's ruling class.THE COMMODORE. By Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $22.50.) The 17th installment of the saga of Capt. Jack Aubrey of the British Navy and his ship's doctor, Stephen Maturin, at sea in the 19th century.AdvertisementTHE CUNNING MAN. By Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this wise and entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto, is a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine.DEEP RIVER. By Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr. Endo's novel follows soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.THE DISTINGUISHED GUEST. By Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $24.) The story of an ailing, famous mother who intrudes on the domesticity of her youngest son is also a subtle exploration of the conflicts of public and private selves.A DIVING ROCK ON THE HUDSON: Volume 2 of "Mercy of a Rude Stream." By Henry Roth. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) When it rains it pours: 60 years after "Call It Sleep," Mr. Roth, back at the keyboard, plunges on with a purposely garrulous narration whose hero looks much like himself and whose life story centers on a spectacular sin.EAST, WEST: Stories. By Salman Rushdie. (Pantheon, $21.) Nine stories by the fugitive author of "The Satanic Verses," some boisterous, some provocative, all taking some advantage of Mr. Rushdie's difficult dual heritage.THE FEAST OF FOOLS. By John David Morley. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) This exuberant and inventive updating of the myth of Demeter and Persephone, set in Munich in 1987, is also a homage to the author's adopted city.FELICIA'S JOURNEY. By William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Trevor's latest novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering England's industrial Midlands until she encounters an awesomely predatory Englishman whose monstrosity is all the scarier for remaining long undefined.FLESH AND BLOOD. By Michael Cunningham. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) An enjoyably sprawling, old-fashioned novel explores the simmering tensions of a suburban family whose overbearing patriarch inspires murderous passions.AdvertisementFROM TIME TO TIME. By Jack Finney. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Simon Morley, hero of Mr. Finney's idiosyncratic novel "Time and Again," returns to scramble the pages of history by trying to prevent World War I.H. By Elizabeth Shepard. (Viking, $17.95.) A brief, affecting first novel about a withdrawn 12-year-old boy whose only emotional connection is with a stuffed toy.HOW LATE IT WAS, HOW LATE. By James Kelman. (Norton, $21.) A novel about a Glasgow ne'er-do-well that charms, persuades and illuminates, though it is written not only in salty talk but in the Glaswegian language.THE INFORMATION. By Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.KONFIDENZ. By Ariel Dorfman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.) This novel in dialogue reveals only gradually that its frightening political developments are taking place in 1939, suggesting that fear is always appropriate.LADDER OF YEARS. By Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) Delia Grinstead, the heroine of Ms. Tyler's 13th novel (a fairy tale of sorts), decides at 40 that she'd rather be somebody else -- so she simply walks out of her old life.THE LOVE LETTER. By Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA. By Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) At a sign from heaven, the Polish heroine of this frolicky picaresque novel abandons her virginity; when martial law arrives in 1981, she opens serious negotiations with the powers of political darkness.AdvertisementTHE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES. By Robert Musil. Translated by Sophie Wilkins and Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the unfinished and unfinishable novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged readership.MASTER OF THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. By Leo Perutz. (Arcade, $19.95.) First published in Austria in 1921, after the empire's collapse in the Great War, this elaborate joke of a novel takes the genre itself as a stage for brilliant clowning.THE MATISSE STORIES. By A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $17.) A trio of short stories, each featuring the work of Henri Matisse and each containing sharp insights into female sensibilities.MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE. By Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.MEN IN BLACK. By Scott Spencer. (Knopf, $23.) A smart, affectionate comic novel in which an honorable but unsuccessful novelist's life is overturned when his pseudonymous potboiler about extraterrestrials becomes a best seller.MOO. By Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) The novelist who is fast becoming the Balzac of the contemporary Midwest sets her newest book on the campus of a big agricultural university and puts a 700-pound pig right in the middle.MOVING HOUSE: Stories. By Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer, which turn on the longings and workings of memory, are rooted in the highly idiosyncratic history of Gdansk.MY EDUCATION: A Book of Dreams. By William S. Burroughs. (Viking, $21.95.) A barely fictionalized dream journal that offers a whirlwind valedictory tour of the author's unconscious.AdvertisementNOVEL WITHOUT A NAME. By Duong Thu Huong. (Morrow, $23.) Ten years in the army of North Vietnam transform the protagonist of this gritty novel as he and his nation are stripped of the ideals they have sacrificed so much for.OBJECTS IN MIRROR ARE CLOSER THAN THEY APPEAR. By Katharine Weber. (Crown, $23.) In an engaging, elegantly written first novel, the ghosts of a young woman's past inhibit her efforts to help her best friend escape from a destructive love affair.OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS. By Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) An exorcist becomes infatuated with the possessed 12-year-old daughter of an 18th-century marquis in this magical, fatalistic novel.THE PAPERBOY. By Pete Dexter. (Random House, $23.) An eerie and beautiful novel whose emotionally alienated title character, a reporter in quest of facts only, is outmaneuvered by violent half-wits who know what they want.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.THE POINT: Stories. By Charles D'Ambrosio. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) An impressive collection, mixing the exotic and the familiar, precise as to prose, various as to tone, emotionally generous.A PRIVATE VIEW. By Anita Brookner (Random House, $23.) The aptly named George Bland attempts to escape his placid routine with a young and surly New Age devotee.THE PROMISE OF REST. By Reynolds Price. (Scribner, $24.) The third and presumably final chapter of the chronicle of the Mayfield-Kendal family, in which contemporary woes overtake the clan.REDEYE: A Western. By Clyde Edgerton. (Algonquin, $17.95.) An elaborate, unbelievable plot, chock-full of believable, well-developed characters, sustains this woolly western by an admirable Southern novelist.RIDING THE RAP. By Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $22.95.) A dandy re-readable thriller set in post-modern America, land of wised-up rabble and zero authenticity; its crooks intend a whole new crime, never perpetrated before.AdvertisementA RIVER TOWN. By Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $24.) It's 1899 in Mr. Keneally's impassioned 21st novel, and Tim Shea, an outsider in an Australia with no insiders, inexorably digs himself into deeper and deeper trouble by always trying to do the right thing.RULE OF THE BONE. By Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $22.) A novel that reinvigorates the Huck Finn myth in the person of Chappie, a mall rat from upstate New York who lights out for Jamaica with a runaway farm worker.THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE: A Novel of the Limehouse Murders. By Peter Ackroyd. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) A claustrophobic, agitated novel of London in 1880; everyone (including a clutch of famous contemporary reformers) is connected to everyone else.THE TUNNEL. By William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This great big novel (652 pages) by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist, a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is plausible.THE UNUSUAL LIFE OF TRISTAN SMITH. By Peter Carey. (Knopf, $24.) Its tough, spare, considered language sustains this big and thoughtful novel, whose hero learns that imperialism is universal, bad for weak and strong alike.A VOID. By Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken just to exhibit their latent existence.WAITING FOR THE DARK, WAITING FOR THE LIGHT. By Ivan Klima. (Grove, $21.) A fine, skeptical novel, published in Prague in 1993; its hero, a cameraman and would-be film maker, fears that the corruption of spirit induced under the old regime may be permanent.THE WEDDING. By Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A fascinating, deceptively substantial novel by an 87-year-old survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main subject is the subtle assumptions of color, class, race and status in a summer colony of upper-class black families.AdvertisementWONDER BOYS. By Michael Chabon. (Villard, $23.) An intelligent, lyrical book whose graceful melancholy and good humor save it from being just a novel about a novelist making a novel. HistoryADMITTING THE HOLOCAUST: Collected Essays. By Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford University, $23.) Mr. Langer, a retired professor of English, illuminates the literature of the Holocaust -- the chronicles of ghetto and camp, the fiction and poetry wrought out of the horror, the representations in film and on television.THE AGE OF EXTREMES: A History of the World, 1914-1991. By Eric Hobsbawm. (Pantheon, $30.) The Marxist historian's account of the modern world as the battleground between socialism and capitalism.ART FROM THE ASHES: A Holocaust Anthology. Edited by Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford University, $30.) A remarkable collection of personal accounts, both by well-known survivors and by victims otherwise obscure, and of fiction, poetry and art related to the cataclysm.DEATH AND DELIVERANCE: "Euthanasia" in Germany c. 1900-1945. By Michael Burleigh. (Cambridge University, cloth, $59.95; paper, $18.95.) An artful and dispassionate account of the Nazi program to kill the handicapped and mentally ill.EXCELLENT CADAVERS: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic. By Alexander Stille. (Pantheon, $27.50.) This fascinating and horrifying examination, based on immense piles of documents, shows how in the last 25 years the Mafia has terrorized Sicilian society and perverted Italian politics.FACING FACTS: Realism in American Thought and Culture, 1850-1920. By David E. Shi. (Oxford University, $35.) A history of the shift of the American mind from romanticism to realism from just before the Civil War to the end of World War I.THE FALL OF THE ASANTE EMPIRE: The Hundred-Year War for Africa's Gold Coast. By Robert B. Edgerton. (Free Press, $23.) An accessible narrative of the bloody struggle that resulted in the fall of the Asante to British imperialists.THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History. By Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr. Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the many gifted writers who saw action.FOR THE PRESIDENT'S EYES ONLY: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency From Washington to Bush. By Christopher Andrew. (HarperCollins, $30.) A thoughtful and judicious history of the use of espionage by Presidents, with an emphasis on the last six decades.THE FORBIDDEN BEST-SELLERS OF PRE-REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE. By Robert Darnton. (Norton, $27.50.) A graceful and informative account of the role dissident literature played in creating the fervor that resulted in the French Revolution.THE GENERALS' WAR: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf. By Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A lucid, meticulously researched report by the chief Pentagon correspondent of The New York Times and a retired general who is director of national security programs at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government.THE HOLLOW YEARS: France in the 1930s. By Eugen Weber. (Norton, $25.) The author, a historian devoted to France, rises from immersion in the documents bearing this scintillating, entertaining account of an unworthy but fascinating period in French life.IMPERIAL GERMANY, 1871-1914: Economy, Society, Culture and Politics. By V. R. Berghahn. (Berghahn Books, cloth, $59.95; paper, $17.95.) A comprehensive account of German society from the founding of the Kaiser's empire to its collapse in World War I.IN RETROSPECT: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam. By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The former Secretary of Defense explains, regretfully, how he and his can-do colleagues got stuck fast in the Vietnam War.IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur -- The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World. By David Fromkin. (Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made the 20th century what it is.KILLING CUSTER: The Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Fate of the Plains Indians. By James Welch with Paul Stekler. (Norton, $25.) A meditation on the ways Custer and Sitting Bull have reverberated through historical memory, white and American Indian.LANDSCAPE AND MEMORY. By Simon Schama. (Knopf, $40.) A learned and perceptive survey of Western attitudes toward nature in the last five centuries; Mr. Schama's starting point is the Renaissance fascination with river, forest and mountain as signs of a revered prototypal world.LONDON: A Social History. By Roy Porter. (Harvard University, $29.95.) The development of the Great Wen over 400 years, examined as a quasi-biological explosion that everyone feared and no one could curtail.MY FIVE CAMBRIDGE FRIENDS: Burgess, Maclean, Philby, Blunt and Cairncross by Their K.G.B. Controller. By Yuri Modin with Jean-Charles Deniau and Aguieszka Ziarek. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) The inside stuff from the Russian intelligence officer who controlled the famous British moles.OSWALD'S TALE: An American Mystery. By Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) Stoked by a passion to believe J.F.K.'s death was more than a meaningless absurdity, Mr. Mailer pursues and delivers the assassin's very slightly significant soul, using his own research and that of others.THE PHILBY FILES: The Secret Life of Master Spy Kim Philby. By Genrikh Borovik. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A Russian writer and television personality draws upon his acquaintance with the aging English double agent as well as previously unreleased K.G.B. documents to tell this century's greatest espionage story.THE ROCKET AND THE REICH: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile Era. By Michael J. Neufeld. (Free Press, $25.) A chronicle of the Nazis' brutal V-2 rocket program and the German scientists who became the American space technologists of 1945 and after.THE SECRET WORLD OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM. Edited by Harvey Klehr, John Earl Haynes and Fridrikh Igorevich Firsov. (Yale University, $25.) A collection of newly released Soviet documents shows that the Communist Party in the United States received financial support from the Kremlin and that the party established an espionage apparatus.SPEAK NOW AGAINST THE DAY: The Generation Before the Civil Rights Movement in the South. By John Egerton. (Knopf, $35.) A magisterial account of the generation of Southerners, white and black, who fought segregation from 1932 to 1954.TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s. By Ann Douglas. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change. By Allister Sparks. (Hill & Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced, gripping account of the long, slow and often clandestine process that led to the end of apartheid.TREASON IN THE BLOOD: H. St. John Philby, Kim Philby, and the Spy Case of the Century. By Anthony Cave Brown. (Marc Jaffe/Houghton Mifflin, $29.95.) A dual biography arguing that Kim Philby, the notorious English double agent, inherited a propensity for duplicity from his adventuresome father. Medicine & PsychologyAN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS: Seven Paradoxical Tales. By Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) More tales of the engrossingly abnormal by a generous, humane neurologist who explores the peculiar thinking of both physician and patient.BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind. By Patricia Meyer Spacks. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner experience" as the locus of personal reality.NIGHT: Night Life, Night Language, Sleep, and Dreams. By A. Alvarez. (Norton, $23.) Personal and literary explorations of the less visible (and therefore more conjectural) half of life by a gifted critic and acutely intuitive memoirist. PoetryTHE ANNALS OF CHILE. By Paul Muldoon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Easier of access and more emotionally direct than his previous work, these poems are also more arcane and allusive -- especially the long autobiographical sequence "Yarrow," an account of the birth of the poet's imagination.THE COLLECTED POEMS OF LANGSTON HUGHES. Edited by Arnold Rampersad and David Roessel. (Knopf, $30.) Except for juvenilia, all the poems, including hundreds Hughes himself did not include in collections. Altogether they remind us that he had perhaps the greatest affinity for popular speech and song of any American poet in this century.THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A New Verse Translation. By Robert Pinsky. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A near-symphonic rendition of the tour through hell attains a truly Dantean velocity without missing a jot or a tittle.A SCATTERING OF SALTS: Poems. By James Merrill. (Knopf, $20.) Merrill's last collection, published just weeks after his death. These poems have the unfailing style and varied brilliance one expects, but also a sense of summing up -- a wealth of poetry reaching its final form.SELECTED POEMS, 1965-1990. By Marilyn Hacker (Norton, $22.) Supple, and colloquial, formalism gives an inviting elegance to poems of often astonishing directness, heated passion and a vision of the human family that calls into question virtually all of what are called traditional values. Politics & Current AffairsALLAH O AKBAR: A Journey Through Militant Islam. By Abbas. (Phaidon/Chronicle, $60.) A broad and gloomy photographic examination of 29 countries by an Iranian-born photojournalist whose subjects seem rarely to take any time out from the utmost rigors of the faith.BROKEN COVENANT: American Foreign Policy and the Crisis Between the U.S. and Israel. By Moshe Arens. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) A senior Israeli politician indicts Bush Administration policy as meddlesome and duplicitous.COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya. By Stephen Handelman. (Yale University, $27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia, now a lawless land at the mercy of organized crime.THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE: How Law Is Suffocating America. By Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) A lawyer argues that this would be a better country if we had less law.DEFENDING PORNOGRAPHY: Free Speech, Sex and the Fight for Women's Rights. By Nadine Strossen. (Scribner, $22.) The president of the American Civil Liberties Union polemicizes againt the branch of the feminist movement that advocates censorship of sexually explicit materials.DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL. By Jean Bethke Elshtain. (Basic Books, $20.) A thoughtful professor of ethics argues that the weakness of democratic institutions in America reflects the replacement of rights conceived as immunities from government interference by rights conceived as individual entitlements.THE DE-MORALIZATION OF SOCIETY: From Victorian Virtues to Modern Values. By Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Knopf, $24.) The distinguished historian argues that the West has lost its moral compass over the course of the 20th century.THE END OF REFORM: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War. By Alan Brinkley. (Knopf, $27.50.) In the late 1930's, a distinguished historian argues, liberal interventionism lost its nerve and settled for underwriting consumer demand, with the results we now see around us.GOOD COP, BAD COP: Detective Joe Trimboli's Heroic Pursuit of NYPD Officer Michael Dowd. By Mike McAlary. (Pocket Books, $23.) Mr. McAlary, a New York newspaper columnist who followed the case closely, reports on a police corruption investigation that appears to have been frustrated by departmental solidarity.THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism. By Tina Rosenberg. (Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct under the old regimes.AN INTIMATE HISTORY OF HUMANITY. By Theodore Zeldin. (HarperCollins, $25.) Not history so much as informed rumination by an Oxford social historian who talks to many people (mostly Frenchwomen) about the fundamentals of human experience -- hope, despair, love, etc. -- and thinks that hope still has a chance.KWANZAA AND ME: A Teacher's Story. By Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University, $18.95.) A wise kindergarten teacher, long committed to integration, re-examines its value by paying attention to what children and parents say.LAND OF OPPORTUNITY: One Family's Quest for the American Dream in the Age of Crack. By William M. Adler. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) Solid reportage about how a family of poor Arkansas blacks became the kingpins of crack in Detroit.LOSING GROUND: American Environmentalism at the Close of the 20th Century. By Mark Dowie. (MIT, $25.) A courageous critique of the environmental movement that contends its leadership has ceded the moral high ground to become just another special interest in Washington.A NATION UNDER LAWYERS: How the Crisis in the Legal Profession Is Transforming American Society. By Mary Ann Glendon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) A Harvard law professor sees hyperactive litigators and "romantic" judges as depriving the nation of lawyers' real talents: solving problems and designing social structures.THE NEW VICTORIANS: A Young Woman's Challenge to the Old Feminist Order. By Rene Denfeld. (Warner, $21.95.) The author, who is 28, contends that established feminism, like its suffragist predecessor, has abandoned the quest for equal status and turned to bashing male vices.ONE BY ONE FROM THE INSIDE OUT: Essays and Reviews on Race and Responsibility in America. By Glenn C. Loury. (Free Press, $25.) An African-American economist tackles race and poverty in a collection of biting pieces that emphasize black self-help while also calling on the Government to aid the nation's poor.OVERCOMING LAW. By Richard A. Posner. (Harvard University, $39.95.) The author, a high Federal judge and former law professor, examines the plight of the law from a "law and economics" viewpoint, urging more respect for the empirical reality of legal issues.PRESIDENTIAL WAR POWER. By Louis Fisher. (University Press of Kansas, cloth, $29.95; paper, $14.95.) An argument that Presidents have violated constitutional limits on war-making power ever since the Korean War.RETHINKING AMERICA. By Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) An examination of and prescription for America's economy in a changed world order.THE REVOLT OF THE ELITES AND THE BETRAYAL OF DEMOCRACY. By Christopher Lasch. (Norton, $22.) The ills of democracy, Lasch passionately contends, arise from such defaults as the abdication of responsibility for the community by economic elites and the propagation by academics of a skeptical relativism.TEMPTATIONS OF A SUPERPOWER. By Ronald Steel. (Harvard University, $18.95.) The author, who teaches international relations at the University of Southern California, criticizes American foreign policy as muddled and wasteful and offers suggestions in keeping with contemporary conditions.WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story. By Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf, $25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story. By Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf, $25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars. Religion & PhilosophyGOD: A Biography. By Jack Miles. (Knopf, $27.50.) Not a joke but a scholarly, entertaining literary inquiry into the character called God as His multiple personalities have been rendered through the ages in the Hebrew Bible.KILLING TIME: The Autobiography of Paul Feyerabend. By Paul Feyerabend. (University of Chicago, $22.95.) In this memoir by a philosopher who died last year, his characteristic talent for raising hackles is clearly in evidence, as well as the intellectual incisiveness that underlies his challenges to the epistemology of science.POPE JOHN PAUL II: The Biography. By Tad Szulc. (Lisa Drew/Scribner, $27.50.) Mr. Szulc, a seasoned reporter of Polish birth, inquires into the special circumstances of Polish Catholicism and the special stresses of fascist and Communist domination that formed the present Pope. ScienceAFTER THE FACT: Two Countries, Four Decades, One Anthropologist. By Clifford Geertz. (Harvard University, $22.95.) The leading anthropologist of his generation looks back on his career and finds himself with more questions than answers.MARIE CURIE: A Life. By Susan Quinn. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A biography of the great Polish scientist that conveys the warmth and genius of the two-time Nobel laureate.A MOMENT ON THE EARTH: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism. By Gregg East erbrook. (Viking, $27.95.) Essays on the most complex of modern subjects, treating our considerable environmental accomplishments and our puzzling neglect of threats (diseases, for instance) in other people's backyards.MONSTERS OF THE SEA. By Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $30.) A delightful and learned adventure in cryptozoology (the study of hidden life forms, including the leviathan, the sea serpent, the kraken, the blob and the globster).NANO. The Emerging Science of Nanotechnol ogy: Remaking the World -- Molecule by Molecule. By Ed Regis. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) Crisp science journalism about a possible world of endless bounty, produced by incredibly tiny machines.NOAH'S CHOICE: The Future of Endangered Species. By Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer. (Knopf, $24.) The authors persuasively contend that humans will decide, by default or by intention, who goes extinct, and at present have not a clue how to do so wisely.PALE BLUE DOT: A Vision of the Human Future in Space. By Carl Sagan. (Random House, $35.) A scientist predicts that when the solar system meets its end, our species will survive by colonizing other worlds.REFLECTIONS OF EDEN: My Years With the Orangutans of Borneo. By Birute M. F. Galdikas. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) An offbeat personal memoir that examines her own life and work, by a woman who studied the most autonomous ape. Science FictionBECOMING HUMAN. By Valerie J. Freireich. (Roc, paper, $4.99.) A familiar theme -- how human are the artificially cloned "toolmen" of a moralistic but class-conscious society? -- is given a fresh treatment is this impressive debut novel.THE DIAMOND AGE: Or, A Young Lady's Illustrated Primer. By Neal Stephenson. (Spectra Bantam, $22.95). The author of the manic "Snowcrash" foresees a future where the marvels of cyberspace and nanotechnology coexist with a revival of Victorian social discipline.HUMILITY GARDEN: An Unfinished Biography. By Felicity Savage. (Roc, paper, $4.99.) Art is literally murder in this intensely imagined novel, written when the author was a 19-year-old sophomore at Columbia University.THE KILLING STAR. By Charles Pellegrino and George Zebrowski. (Avonova/Morrow, $22.) A novel that coolly examines the advantages and disadvantages of interstellar communication and concludes that intelligent species would be wise to adopt a strategy of "shoot first, talk later."LUNCHING WITH THE ANTICHRIST: A Family History, 1925-2015. By Michael Moorcock. (Mark V. Ziesing, Box 76, Shingletown, Calif. 96088, $25.) This fine collection of stories reflects the literate and humane approach to science fiction that the author championed when he edited the British magazine New Worlds in the 1960's.THEY FLY AT CIRON. By Samuel R. Delany. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $19.95.) This biting parable about the bloody roots of civilization represents a felicitous collaboration between the mature Delany and his younger self, who wrote the first version of this tale in 1962.  Spies & ThrillersCHINA WHITE. By Peter Maas. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) In his first thriller, the investigative reporter explores heroin trafficking with its interconnections between Chinese gangs, the mob and American intelligence agencies.THE CODICIL. By Tom Topor. (Hyperion, $21.95.) When a wealthy industrialist leaves half his estate to the child he fathered in Vietnam, a private investigator must uncover secrets about the dead man's past in order to deliver the legacy.A CROOKED MAN. By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) An attentive thriller by a daily reviewer for The Times; it debates the decriminalization of drugs in an up-to-date Washington environment.FREE TO TRADE. By Michael Ridpath. (HarperCollins, $23.) Murder is the starting point in this first novel about an English bond trader who stumbles across financial chicanery.KOLYMSKY HEIGHTS. By Lionel Davidson. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) An American agent braves Siberia to uncover the secret of a Soviet doomsday machine.THE LAST HIGH GROUND. By Robin A. White. (Crown, $23.) Cultures clash but eventually collaborate as an American investigator and a Japanese accountant pursue a Japanese Mafioso who is sabotaging Boeing airplanes.JAPANESE GAME. By Richard Hoyt. (Forge/ Tom Doherty, $21.) A team of American operatives takes drastic action to alter trade relations with Japan.OUR GAME. By John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) In a British adventure novel redolent of John Buchan and Eric Ambler, a retired Treasury official and secret spymaster sets off in search of a vanished friend -- a onetime double agent.PICTURES AT 11. By Norman Spinrad. (Bantam, paper, $12.95.) A group of ecoterrorists take a television station hostage but succumb to the temptations of celebrity. SportsBREAKING THE SURFACE. By Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The Olympic swimmer's earnest memoir reveals the dark realities beneath his public facade -- damaging addictions, suicide attempts, destructive love affairs and infection with H.I.V.ONE PITCH AWAY: The Players' Stories of the 1986 League Championships and World Series. By Mike Sowell. (Macmillan, $27.95.) Recollections of the dramatic series of baseball games that decided the pennants, then the World Series, of 1986.STRIKEOUT: A Celebration of the Art of Pitching. By William Curran. (Crown, $23.) An entertaining history of the evolution of the pitcher from lowly "server" of the ball to strikeout artist.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this review appears in print on June 11, 1995, on Page 7007018 of the National edition with the headline: Books for Vacation Reading.  Today's Paper|Subscribe

AFTER lean times that lasted almost 10 years,East End baymen are celebrating a bountiful harvest of bay scallops."Incredible" is a word that comes up when baymen and others in the seafood business speak about the season that opened in October and runs through the end of next month.Before 1985, when the algae blooms known as the brown tide infested East End waters, the small sweet bay scallop -- a delicacy prized not just locally but also in fancy restaurants in Manhattan and beyond -- was a mainstay for baymen, the fishermen who make their living off the fertile breeding grounds of Long Island waters.Harvests fluctuated from year to year, but demand always seemed to outpace supply, and baymen traditionally dropped everything to go scalloping, at least in the early weeks of the season.AdvertisementAt the height of the brown tide in 1986 scientists found concentrations of the microscopic plant that makes up brown tide as high as 2.5 million cells a milliliter, or 10 times the level at which scientists believe other marine life begins to suffer. The condition turned waters a coffee brown and crowded out or suffocated other marine organisms. Thousands of acres of eelgrass, an important habitat for juvenile fin fish and shellfish, died when the blooms blocked out sunlight.When the brown tide did not appear in 1988 members of Green Seal, an umbrella organization of baymen's associations, started to plant a million quarter-size seed scallops from Fishers Island in waters off Orient Point, Hallock's Bay and Northwest Harbor.But a series of disasters stymied the efforts to restock the waters. In the first year, the scallops starved to death, the brown tide wiping out the algae and plankton they eat as well as the eelgrass in which they nest. Next predatory starfish and spider crabs ate the winter seedlings. Then some juvenile, or immature, scallops disappeared. Weeks later they were found about a mile away.Bay scallops were once as synonymous with Long Island as ducks and potatoes, constituting an industry of $1.5 million to $2 million a year to the baymen. To counter the tide, organizations and government agencies undertook a variety of reseeding efforts.Seedings began in 1986, with the shipment of Long Island scallops to Maine for spawning. The "bugs" were then sent to Fishers Island, where they grew until mature enough to be reseeded in the Flanders Bay-Peconic Bay system. The State Urban Development Corporation and Environmental Conservation Department, with Suffolk County, financed the project, providing more than $200,000 over a four-year period.A marine specialist with the Cornell Cooperative Extension Suffolk County office in Riverhead, Christopher Smith, said another reseeding program, which concentrated on the western Peconic area, received Federal financing through the Peconic Estuary Program after the Peconics' acceptance into the National Estuary program in 1992. Initially financed with $50,000, that program has been given an additional $76,000 for more seeding and research.When the brown tide spread through the bays, the baymen stopped scalloping."The scallops disappeared in one year," said Ed Warner Jr. one of the few baymen who continue to work full time."In 1986 there was probably not a live scallop anywhere in the bay," added Mr. Warner, who learned his trade on Shinnecock Bay from his grandfather and father.AdvertisementMr. Warner, who has a degree in marine technology from Suffolk Community College, said he was on the water year-round, "from sunrise to sunset most days." He continued to harvest scallops in Shinnecock Bay at the end of last month, although the supply was nowhere near what it had been in October.He estimated that in the course of the season 1,000 of the 30-inch-wide scallop dredges that baymen drag from their boats had been back and forth over the bottom. Of all the bays, Shinnecock was perhaps the most bountiful when the season opened."The first couple of days you just shoved them into the basket," Mr. Warner said. "That is when it was good. Now you pick through the mud."Nearly four months into the season, on a winter morning that dawned with snow flurries, Mr. Warner was on the water again, sorting through the eelgrass, mud, rocks and shells that each of his 10 dredges brought up from the bottom.Moving quickly, he picked out four or five mature scallops from each load, pitched the debris overboard and heaved the dredge back into the water. Any immature scallops in the mix were returned to the bay, which was otherwise perfectly still. Mr. Warner appeared to have the waters all to himself."Any time in the first weeks there would have been 50 other boats," he said. Back then, he said, the daily limit of 10 bushels a bayman. or 20 bushels a boat, could be harvested in a few hours.His goal that day was to fill his bushel basket three times, he said, a harvest that he was counting on to net him $150. He estimated that his 22-foot craft, the Privateer, would consume 30 gallons of fuel plus two quarts of oil, narrowing his profit margin.Jon Semlear, a bayman and Southampton Town trustee, said fishermen were receiving $7 a pound for scallops at the end of January. Earlier, when the harvest was at its peak, the price had dropped, to $4.50.AdvertisementThe owner of Cor-J Seafood in Hampton Bays, Jim Coronesi, said a bushel of scallops might yield as few as three or four pounds of meat or as much as 10 pounds. He said that his wholesale price in late January stood at $8.50 a pound and that scallops were retailing for about $10. The wholesale price had dropped as low as $5.50 when they were at their most plentiful.Back then, consumers who had seen prices soar to almost $20 a pound in previous years were feasting after the famine. They were paying $6.50 a pound.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This season was "the best we have seen in probably 15 years, especially in Shinnecock," said Mr. Coronesi.Southampton, in general, did especially well, according to Mr. Semlear. Supervisor Hudson B. (Hoot) Sherman of Shelter Island also reported an exceptional season, noting that scallops were not only plentiful in local waters, but were also bigger than usual.In Southold, Bay Constable Donald Dzenkowski called it a banner year for scallops.A trustee of East Hampton, James McCaffrey, sounded a lone slightly negative note. Mr. McCaffrey said that "state waters were very good," but suggested that the yield from town waters had been disappointing.State waters generally open a few weeks before the creek areas and interior harbors, which the towns have controlled since the colonial era.Mr. Dzenkowski said the improvement in his area had been gradual, though this year's yield was "a lot more than expected."The towns' seeding programs are often cited as contributing to the recovery. This year, a trustee of Southampton, Scott Strough, the trustees are planning to place one million seed scallops in town waters at a cost of $25,000.East Hampton operates a a hatchery to provide seed clams and oysters, as well as scallops.Seeding, by all accounts, improves the odds considerably. But Mr. Warner said luck also played a major role in producing the bumper crop. Not only were there no signs of the brown tide, but the infestation that drastically reduced the scallop population after 1985 apparently killed its predators, as well.Advertisement"The scallops are back, but not the predators," he said. "And there is eelgrass. Mother Nature treated us well."Scallops nest in eelgrass, which helps keep them off the bottom and hidden from predators.Because the causes of the brown tide remain largely unknown, no one can say if and when it might return. Moreover, seeding scallops "is not like a farmer's planting potatoes," Mr. Warner said. The larvae, which float in the water for 14 days before developing, "can end up anywhere on the Island," he said. The weather at the time of spawning can also significantly affect the scallops.Despite the seeding, Mr. Warner said, he is concerned about the next season. He said he had not spotted enough babies this year to indicate a good crop of mature scallops in October.Mr. Semlear agreed, saying: "Next year we're not going to have that many." Seeding "enhances spawning stock," but in the end "it's the luck of the draw."Scallops that escape predators and the risk of burial by shifting sediments typically live 18 months, spawning once, sometimes twice. Among the variables that affect them, Mr. Semlear speculated, two dry summers, with little runoff to carry pollution into the waters had probably helped pave the way for the crop this year.Conditions appear to have been less favorable for the scallop population that will reach maturity in time for next season, he said.Should next year yield a poor harvest, the only acceptable substitute for aficionados of the Long Island bay scallop is the one from Cape Cod.  "Last year we bought a lot from Martha's Vineyard," Mr. Coronesi said. "You could not tell the difference."This year there was no need to supplement the local harvest, which also outstripped the competition in size. "Our scallop seems to be a lot bigger," Mr. Coronesi said, referring to the firm adductor muscle, known as the eye, which is the edible section.AdvertisementChina is also producing scallops of the same genus and species, according to Mr. Coronesi. They are inexpensive and very good, he acknowledged, but are less desirable, because they are only available frozen. As for the Southern, or calico scallop, it is inexpensive and plentiful, he added, but its size and shape make it uneconomical to open by hand, and it loses much of its flavor when it is steamed open.The market has shown that people will pay more for the real thing. There were even times, Mr. Warner acknowledged, when the bay scallop scarcity worked to a bayman's economic advantage."That first year, when they were paying $16 a pound, if you got eight or 10 pounds a day, you could actually make more money," than when they were plentiful, he said.Yet it was tough. "When you're only getting a bushel a day," he said, "mentally it's hard to go out there."This year, especially with the mild weather, the mood is entirely different. "I'm 35 years old," said Mr. Warner, adding that he has been on the water since he was 8. "I learned to do anything that can be done on the water, trap in spring, gill net in summer, catch clams, oysters and eels."I could do anything. But the good scallop season is a boost in the arm for me. For a full-time bayman it's a real help. It means I can go to work and I don't have to worry about it. It's a little bit of job security."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 1995, on Page LI13 of the National edition with the headline: Baymen Rejoice As Sweet Bay Scallops Return. 
Going Home to BrooklynQ.  After 48 years in southern California, my wife and I want to "go home again" to Brooklyn. No travel agency brochure I've seen has that itinerary, but I believe there are small groups or even individuals who give personal tours of the borough. Can you help? -- Ed Wissner, Los Alamitos, Calif.A.  Maybe the first date you should put in your diary is the second Sunday in June (June 11 this year): that's when the annual Welcome Back to Brooklyn Festival is held along Eastern Parkway from Grand Army Plaza to the Brooklyn Museum. About 300,000 people from all over the city and country attend, according to its organizers, the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn, a nonprofit arts and cultural group.After that, the choices for touring your home borough are wide and what follows is necessarily a partial list:Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment, Tennis House, Prospect Park, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11215, (718) 788-8500, organizes 50 tours to different parts of the borough on weekends from March to December. The tours, led by academics and specialists, range in subject matter from architecture to social and art history and nature. Among the more popular are "Neighborhood Noshing" outings that sample the enormous variety of ethnic foods the borough offers. One recent three-hour tour of Sunset Park tasted the foods of the Caribbean, Central America, Mexico, Scandinavia, Turkey and China. Tours, which last two to three hours, are $7 a person.Louis Singer, 75 Henry Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201, (718) 875-9084, has been conducting tours of the borough for 26 years from a historical, ethnic and architectural perspective. Some 200 tours a year are held, under such titles as "The Brownstone Crescent" (visiting Brooklyn Heights, Cobble Hill, Carroll Gardens, Park Slope, Clinton Hill and Fort Greene), "Fabulous Flatbush," "Jewish Brooklyn" and "Waterfront Brooklyn." The tours, costing $25 a person for 10 people in an air-conditioned bus (minimum of eight people), last five and a half to six hours. For the $200 minimum fee Mr. Singer will also conduct tours for individuals and couples.AdvertisementThe Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201, (718) 624-0890, organizes about 12 walking tours a year of various neighborhoods in the borough, the fee for which is usually about $10 a person for nonmembers. The next tour, on Feb. 4, is called "Exploring Brooklyn's Chinatown," on and around Eighth Avenue. Other tours will be announced in the society's newsletter and calendar of events, which are published three times a year.Big Apple Greeters, 1 Center Street, 20th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10007, (212) 669-2896, pairs volunteer guides with out-of-towners with the aim of improving New York City's worldwide image. Since the organization was started in May 1992 it has shown off the five boroughs to 6,000 visitors from 44 states and 56 countries. Tours usually last two to four hours and are free, although visitors who enjoy the service can make a donation to the group. From Spain to Marrakesh  Q.  I am one of four senior citizens who will be in Rota, Spain, next February and would like to get from there to Marrakesh, Morocco. Can you help? -- Doris B. Hiester, Highland Falls, N.Y.A.  Getting from one to the other could well be a complicated journey. There are a number of ways of doing it, none very straightforward.Maybe the best way, according to the Tourist Office of Spain in New York, is to take a bus from Rota to either Cadiz or Jerez de la Frontera, about a 30-minute journey that costs $2 one way, calculated at 131 pesetas to the dollar.From either city take another bus to La Linea, the Spanish town that borders Gibraltar, a trip of about two and a half hours that costs $11.50 one way.From La Linea either walk across the border or take a taxi (about $5) to the Gibraltar airport, which lies between the town of Gibraltar and the Spanish border.Flights from Gibraltar to Marrakesh on GB Airways leave Tuesday and Saturday at 3:55 P.M. The trip takes 1 hour and 15 minutes and the full regular fare is $267 round trip.Tickets are also available through Tourafrica, a tour operator, for $175 round trip. Tourafrica can be reached in Rota at (34 56) 814603.AdvertisementBuses from Rota to Cadiz leave Monday to Friday at 6:30, 7:30, 8:30, 9:30 and 11 A.M. and at 1:30, 2:30, 4:30 and 6:30 P.M.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Saturday the bus leaves at 7:30 and 8:30 A.M. and 1:30, 2:30 and 6:30 P.M. On Sunday and holidays the bus leaves at 7:30 A.M., 1:30 and 6:30 P.M.For information on schedules and fares for buses from either Cadiz or Jerez to La Linea, call Transportes Generales Come, (34 56) 345207. For information on buses from Rota to Cadiz or Jerez call (34 56) 211 763.An alternative is to go from Rota to Jerez, fly from there to Madrid on Aviaco Airlines, from Madrid to Casablanca on Iberia Airlines and from Casablanca to Marrakesh on Air Moroccan Airlines. There are three flights a day from Jerez to Madrid, an hour's flight, and frequent flights between Casablanca and Marrakesh.If neither of those ways appeals, try this: fly from Madrid to Tangier on Iberia and travel from Tangier to Marrakesh by train.The 65-minute flights from Madrid to Tangier leave Tuesday and Saturday at 12:55 P.M., arriving at 1 P.M. Moroccan time.Daily train service from Tangier to Marrakesh leaves at 11:40 P.M., arriving at 9:40 A.M. the next day, and at 4:20 P.M., arriving at 4:57 A.M. the next day. A Kosher Guide  Q.  I have heard about a New York-based club that puts out a directory of kosher restaurants. Can you give me any more information? -- R. Stuart, DallasA.  The group you have in mind is the Kosher Club, which publishes a directory of more than 1,300 kosher restaurants, cafes, takeout spots, resorts, hotels and other facilities in the United States and abroad.The directory covers Canada, Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, England, France, Spain, South Africa, Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan and, of course, Israel.AdvertisementIt covers such subjects as the food offered, ambiance, size, prices and hours, and gives the name, address, phone number and affiliation of the rabbi or certifying agency.A $49.95 annual membership in the club ($5 for additional family members) also brings discounts at 600 kosher restaurants, resorts and hotels, and discounts on car rental and travel, including special packages to Israel.More information: The Kosher Club, 82-84 Genung Street, Middletown, N.Y. 10940; (914) 244-1933, fax (914) 343-4860. TERENCE NEILANAn answer in the Q & A column last Sunday about a kosher restaurant directory misstated the telephone number of its publishers, the Kosher Club of Middletown, N.Y. It is (914) 344-1933.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 1995, on Page 5005028 of the National edition with the headline: Q and A. 
SHE arrives, apologizing.The driver took her first to the old La Goulue and she had to ask directions to the new La Goulue, and that is why she is late. "I don't know the town," Elisabeth Maxwell says in her French-accented English. "When I've come I've had to rely on other people's experience. Like a parcel, really, in the hands of my hosts."As she sits, the women at the surrounding tables don't recognize her. In fact, they look right through her. The royal blue suit and watercolored silk scarf at the throat are on the wrong side of chic for the Upper East Side (where it's taupe or die), and her level of concentration is too grim even for the would-be business lunchers, male and female alike, who sneak admiring glances at their own profiles in the mirror as soon as their guests look down.Mrs. Maxwell has come to discuss her autobiography, "A Mind of My Own" (HarperCollins, $25), which officially marks the end of her life as a parcel. It was an image reinforced by her late husband, the publishing magnate Robert Maxwell, to quash her attempts at independence and establishing a career of her own.In large part, he succeeded. During 46 years of marriage she gave birth to nine children, helped Maxwell start and build Pergamon Press, a science publishing house that grew to such proportion it was sold in 1991 for $766 million, and even in the last decade of his life, as her husband's behavior grew progressively more eccentric and cruel, she remained loyal, despite his prolonged absences and repeated threats of a legal separation. Which he never acted on.AdvertisementWhat she has to show for her efforts is spectacular ruin; debt, dishonor and the potential destruction of two sons' careers. When Maxwell died in 1991, at 68, falling overboard from his yacht, his holdings were vast, including The Daily News in New York and Macmillan Publishing, and the rush of questions was immediate. Was it murder? Suicide? Or just a heart attack? Was he trying to escape the consequences of accumulating a $5 billion debt? Did he purposely leave Ian and Kevin Maxwell liable for the pension funds of thousands of employees that he had illegally used as security against other businesses? (The other children were not employees.)The trial for Mrs. Maxwell's sons, who have been accused of conspiracy to commit fraud, begins this spring in England. She says she is not allowed to talk about it but proves willing to talk about everything else, even the early deaths of two of her children. Her eldest, Michael, was in a car accident in 1961 at age 16 that left him in a coma until he died at 23. A daughter, Karine, died of acute leukemia in 1957 at age 3.Mrs. Maxwell speaks with a candor and dignity that can come only from a wrenching self-scrutiny, the kind most people spend a lifetime avoiding. At 73, she radiates strength. She radiates survival."Once the book was written, it was out of my system, so to speak," she begins. "As soon as my husband died, I never was allowed any time to grieve. I was hoisted on a public platform from Day One. At long last I feel I've buried my husband. I have relived the whole of my life, the good and the bad, and I can speak with a certain amount of detachment. I couldn't talk about Michael's death for years. Now I can because the cutting edge of suffering is gone. It's similar with Bob's death and the circumstances surrounding it."The most pressing issue is the fate of her sons, who she insists are not guilty. She says the financial losses she has sustained since her husband's death, including her own pension and the auction of her Oxford home and personal belongings, weigh on her far less. (For the last two years, she has lived in a borrowed apartment in London.)"Kevin has said to me, 'Mummy, if it comes to pass, I will atone for my father.' " Her look pierces. "This is the overwhelming sadness of my life," she says. "Being left in these circumstances means nothing to me. I have had an extraordinary life. I could have had the moon if it was accessible. But to see my sons' careers in ruin, knowing their character and the kind of men they are, is unacceptable and unforgivable. That they should be left by their father in this mess." Her china blue eyes glint angrily.If she could speak to her husband now, what would she say? "I just would like to ask him what went wrong," she says. "He was a very intelligent man, a gambler, but he knew when to stop to make a good deal. I don't understand how he could make his companies so vulnerable. It seemed very deliberate."Her green salad and Parmesan souffle are served. "It's strange," she continues. "Toward the end of his life he wanted no constraint of any kind. I was a constraint. I was his soul. Looking at me he knew I disapproved of his life style. I was a perpetual reproach. I really have thought a lot about that. The lust for power. I regret now that he didn't die on his 65th birthday because he would have died a hero. He had a great many assets, the banks at his feet. I don't think he was ever liked, but he was admired. What demons pushed him to acquire Macmillan? He didn't need it. Why?"AdvertisementI don't know," she answers herself helplessly. "Power mad. If the world recession hadn't settled in, Maxwell Communications would have become one of the largest companies. He was very modern. He saw things like Internet at a time no one else did. To be able to communicate to the entire world from a desk was a vision he had. He really was a communications man," she says proudly.B UT when it came to personal communications, he seemed to fail. She smiles. "That was really the irony, you know. To communicate between two human beings is a very humble level, and an extremely complex affair. He didn't like doing it."She is formidable, really in her clear-eyed assessment of where she is and how she got here. As she speaks of her family's disgrace, her reserve never falters. Yet, she is not cold. She is not uncaring. She is a realist.Well-born to a French Huguenot family, Mrs. Maxwell studied at the Sorbonne during the Second World War, hoping to become a lawyer. She met Mr. Maxwell in Paris while working for the Welcome Committee for Allied Officers. She was Protestant, he was Jewish, she was rich, he was poor, she was educated, he was not. They married. While he traveled the world, building the business, she stayed at home helping to recreate his family, as he put it, since his parents, three sisters and one brother had been killed in Auschwitz. As their children grew, she continued to work in the company, primarily with the editors, though he refused ever to formalize her position.In the 1980's she returned to college, at Oxford, where she earned a doctorate in French history and became a historian on the Holocaust, with an emphasis on its meaning for Christians. Maxwell still called on her to help with the business, and she always complied, in spite of his flagrant womanizing (which she writes about plainly) and increasingly erratic personal behavior."We had a very strange relationship," she says, sipping her coffee. "With all the ups and downs, he kept his love for me enormously protective. He was really a very sick man at the end of his life, and I couldn't imagine anyone else looking after him, although he had been very beastly with me in that last year. At the time it broke something in me, but I couldn't have stopped looking after him. It was 1987 or 1988 when our paths really diverged. His style of life was too big, too shallow, for me. I embarked on a much more spiritual path. He admired what I was doing, and I didn't understand what he was doing. I couldn't understand the reaching for more and more and more. It frightened me.""So, yes, I feel betrayed," she says flatly. "I cannot imagine he willingly would want me or his children or the pensioners to suffer. I was left only with debts, and I can't repay them. If my friends hadn't lent me money I would have gone bankrupt myself. People like these, to me, redeem the world, and it's not only a question of money. People have been kind without a bean to give me. There is no pattern to the courage to care. Some are marvelous, while some have no heart, no brain. Cowards."Knowing what she knows now about her life, would she do it again? She thinks. "I'll give a mixed answer," she says. "Yes. Bob has given me a life of such dimension that has stretched me so far, he has got the best out of me." She seems unaware of the present tense. "For all this I feel very grateful. I do regret now not to have left him. We would all have been better for it.Advertisement"And knowing what I know to the bitter end now, well, no one would want to see their children suffer that much. That is not acceptable."H ER tone soon grows philosophical. "Ah, it is wonderful to pick and choose the things in life to do better." She shrugs. "The worst years of my life were 1981 to 1991. I was at his beck and call with no kudos, nothing was right. What saved me was my work on the Holocaust. From there I started a new world of studies and also a rethinking of my faith. At the time, I was really suffering a lack of confidence in myself to go it alone. It was stupid, really, the feeling" -- she bites her lip -- "that I couldn't possibly manage. To think now I'm in even tougher circumstances! That is perhaps what I reproach most to him in this putting down of my abilities, demeaning me. He really shouldn't have done that. It wasn't true. Very often my own children said, 'Why not run away?' I very bitterly regret it now," she concludes, though no anger lingers in her voice. "C'est la vie. Nothing is black and white, and with all the difficulties that came there were some great moments."She keeps drinking her coffee, the light shining on her reddish hair. She is fearless, serene. How has she managed it?"I tell you I had made up my mind a long time ago that lies have very small feet," she says. "I find my life is made so much simpler being myself, saying the truth. One's innocence of a misdeed gives extreme strength. And that keeps you relatively free and above the fray."Still, she circles back, once again, to her husband. "What are the driving forces that make people do things?" she wonders. "I hope one day there will be a balance. That time passes, passions fall and eventually some truths emerge. It was really a Greek tragedy that his path should have finished the way it did. And after a lifetime, what did it take, a few months to turn it around." She shakes her head and opens her hands. "Ah, voila!" she says. The questions have no end.After she leaves, the hostess grows curious. "Where is she from?" she wants to know. France, originally, she is told. But she lives in London now. She wants to know more, but a table of regular customers gets up to leave, and they each kiss her on both cheeks as she helps them on with their coats and sees them out the door. She returns, looking quizzical. She had a question about someone, didn't she? Ah, voila! She smiles prettily. She has forgotten.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 1995, on Page C00001 of the National edition with the headline: AT LUNCH WITH: Elisabeth Maxwell; Questions Without Answers. 
ROBERT E. RUBIN first heard about Mexico's currency crisis when he was on Christmas vacation in the British Virgin Islands, just weeks before his move from the National Economic Council in the White House to the office of Secretary of the Treasury. His initial instinct, he tells visitors with the self-deprecating half-smile that has become his trademark in Washington, was to let the Mexicans and the market sort it out, and to return to the important business of casting for bonefish in the azure waters of the Caribbean."My first reaction was that financial distress in Mexico was a very serious problem," he said the other day. "But other countries have had financial problems and the appropriate adjustments get made." The phone kept ringing, though, with a series of increasingly dire warnings from the undersecretary of the treasury, Lawrence H. Summers, and the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, about what could happen next if a currency crisis turned into something far worse.The more the 56-year-old former co-chairman of Goldman Sachs & Company thought about it, the more he became convinced that in Mexico the Administration was faced with the most modern of foreign policy crises: No troops, no nukes, just the potential for global financial apocalypse if Mexico's imminent default on billions of dollars in bonds prompted a pullout from scores of emerging markets for which Mexico was a beacon.Even the enemy was different: Beyond a recalcitrant new Congress, Mr. Rubin was wrestling several million investors -- participants in pension and mutual funds that have rushed into international markets -- who finally put forth a set of non-negotiable demands and were threatening to suck every peso back home from Mexico and leave it in economic rubble.Advertisement"This isn't the old days where there are three rich market manipulators in a back room threatening to pull the pin," Mr. Rubin said. "Now, it's everyone."Ultimately, it was those threats that forced Mr. Rubin and the White House Chief of Staff, Leon Panetta -- who were sharing a pizza at 11:30 Monday night when they were joined by President Clinton -- to decide that Congress was not about to act on $40 billion in loan guarantees and that markets were not about to forgive.A few slices later, the three men opted for Plan B: An extraordinary order to use $20 billion in Treasury funds under the President's control to keep Mexico from defaulting on its short-term bonds and to restore investor confidence. However, $20 billion was not enough, so Mr. Summers was dispatched to squeeze another $17.8 billion out of the International Monetary Fund. The tactic so angered many European allies that when they were asked to formally approve the loan on Wednesday six abstained, opening a rare rift within the organization.Irritating the allies, whose finance ministers he met yesterday in Toronto for the first time as Treasury Secretary, was the least of Mr. Rubin's problems over the last four weeks. Aiding Mexico was a political loser for Mr. Clinton. It was left to Mr. Rubin to tell the President that the markets would no longer wait for Democrats and Republicans to make up their minds, and that the political risk of failing to act could be enormous.In boom times -- that is, until December -- Mexico was the kind of country that President Clinton regularly hailed as an engine of growth for the new American economy. Exports are the source of millions of new, high-wage jobs, the Administration has told anyone who will listen, and demand from the Big Emerging Markets -- from Brazil to China to Indonesia -- are where America's export-led economic future lies.It was a positive message, brimming with hope. In the last few weeks, however, before he even had a chance to move into Lloyd Bentsen's old office on the third floor of the Treasury, Mr. Rubin suddenly found himself explaining to Congress about the two-edged realities of a financial world that at times may be a bit too global for its own good.The first part of the explanation was straightforward: Geography still counts in foreign affairs, and political and social chaos in Mexico would mean trouble on the border: A half million more illegal immigrants, a threat to 700,000 American jobs dependent on exports to Mexico. More difficult was what the soft-spoken Mr. Rubin, choosing his words carefully so as not to trigger the panic he was trying to avoid, called the potential "catalytic impact" of a collapse in the Mexican market."THERE is an unique role that Mexico has played in the past five or six years as a prototype of a developing country coming into the modern world," said Mr. Rubin, who unlike his dressed-to-the-nines predecessor often cruises the hallways of the the Treasury in shirtsleeves, the knot of his tie dangling a few inches below his neck. "It is the linchpin, the model. And I don't think any other country plays such a pivotal role."AdvertisementA massive outflow of investor confidence in Mexico City, he argued, could trigger the same in other economies highly dependent on foreign investment for growth. And that would threaten the reforms, the democratization and the growth to which the United States has linked its own future.Not all of Mr. Rubin's friends on Wall Street fully subscribe to what he calls this "theory of interconnectedness" -- "if that's a word," he adds. One close ally in the investment banking world, who declined to be named, wondered why Mr. Rubin had gone so far. "This notion that if we don't do this, a global meltdown occurs -- I've never seen a Treasury Secretary take that position. And if it's really true, then we shouldn't have been trying to do this alone. Where were the Germans, where were the Japanese?"But Mr. Rubin may have been partially vindicated last Monday, when "interconnectedness" surfaced with a vengeance. As investors realized that the initial rescue plan pending in Congress was dead as an armadillo on the Mexican highway, sell orders spread to economies that shared none of Mexico's immediate problems. Poland, of all places, dropped. And when Mr. Clinton took matters into his own hands on Tuesday, markets around the world recovered. By the end of the week Mr. Rubin was being hailed as the market-savvy hero of a White House otherwise incapable of shooting straight. Even the Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, defended the president's action as "courageous," and told carping Republicans to shut up and give thanks they did not have to vote on an aid plan that 80 percent of Americans oppose.In his first month as Treasury Secretary, Mr. Rubin has worked 20-hour days, grappling with difficult questions: Can the United States afford to be seen as the saviour of any major country whose leaders borrow too much and fail to discipline their own booming economies? Where does the offer stop? In Mexico? In the former Soviet Republics?"Clearly, there's a line we cannot cross," Mr. Rubin said the other day. "Just don't ask me where it is."If the ghosts of past Presidents truly haunt the White House, one old Democrat must have been lurking over that Domino's pizza the other night: Grover Cleveland. Even Newt Gingrich has been telling Congressional colleagues the cautionary tale of what happened to poor Grover 102 years ago.At the time, America was the ultimate emerging market. Mr. Cleveland had barely begun his second term before a panic set in around the world that the United States was about to devalue the dollar. With the Treasury's reserves of gold shrinking, President Cleveland wanted Congress to repeal the law requiring the United States to back its bonds with gold, breaking the artificial linkage between the value of an ounce of gold and the value of the silver coin in which most private transactions were settled.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.THE result was Mexico-scale chaos. The silver mines of the West closed. Riots broke out, unemployment soon soared to 20 percent and the newly jobless marched on Washington. Credit collapsed, industry slowed, imports screeched to a halt and once-enthusiastic European investors pulled out of the country. Mr. Cleveland, like the leaders of Mexico over the past month, argued that the country's fundamentals were sound. But it made no difference. Democrats in his own party rebelled, Republicans who controlled Congress after 1894 refused to cooperate. He had to turn to Wall Street -- to J.P. Morgan and August Belmont -- for the credit he needed to keep the country afloat.A future president, Woodrow Wilson, writing the history of that era, argued that a great revolution had come, but that no one understood it.  "All the world," he wrote, "had in fact become at last a single commercial community."AdvertisementA century later, working from somewhat different and certainly more complex facts, Robert Rubin is making the same case. The combination of his 26-year career at the investment banking house of Goldman Sachs and his low-key style -- he has skillfully turned humility into a powerful weapon -- has given him extraordinary credibility as a mentor on the workings of the new economy. "The problem is that it is a complicated transformation, and very difficult to explain in the public domain," Mr. Rubin said recently. "I've been in on this from the beginning, and I'm still coming to grips with the implications."THE transformation: Developing nations no longer have to depend on bank lending for their capital -- in part because their needs are now far greater than public or private banks could supply. David D. Hale, the chief economist of Kemper Securities, notes that private capital flows to stock and bond markets in Latin America, Asia and Africa were running at $10 billion a year in 1989, and $60 to $80 billion in the last few years -- with Latin America by far the largest recipient of foreign funds. The capitalization of the stock markets in these emerging economies -- the value of all the listed shares -- was $100 billion a decade ago; it is $2.1 trillion now.No place was as much a beneficiary of investor enthusiasm as Mexico. Building on -- and overselling -- the country's deregulatory reforms, its democratization and the benefits of the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mexico sold tens of billions of dollars in stock and debt securities to the United States throughout the 1990's. It was gobbled up by emerging market funds and pension funds that had rarely invested abroad before, and were desperate for alternatives to the paltry 3 percent returns available at home. But along the way, Mexico developed an addiction to the capital, financing its long-term debt with the sale of short-term bonds, called tesobonos. They were essentially Government-issued junk bonds, yielding anywhere from 15 to 50 percent.The Clinton Administration and others quietly warned the country's leaders last year that they were headed for trouble. Mexican officials said they understood the problem, but they did nothing. There was an election on, the leading candidate had just been assassinated, the Chiapas region was still in revolt -- and it was certainly no time to admit economic weakness by devaluing the currency. The outgoing president, Carlos Salinas, was already angling -- with American support -- to become the first head of the new World Trade Organization in Geneva, and he wanted nothing to soil his record of economic reform.How much of Mexico's financial bungling was known to Mr. Rubin as head of the National Economic Council -- the group Mr. Clinton created to coordinate economic policy among competing agencies, much as the National Security Council does in foreign policy -- is a matter of considerable debate in Washington these days. Republicans, led by Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, threatened an investigation.For his part, Mr. Rubin told reporters recently that the warning signals, while evident, did not suggest the size of the problem on the horizon. "No one I'm aware of saw what was really coming," he said.Watching how Mr. Rubin handled a hostile Congress over the past month quickly became one of Washington's chief spectator sports, largely because he was constantly being compared to Mr. Bentsen, the master of the art form. The 74-year-old Texan, many believed, would never have permitted the $40 billion loan guarantee program to languish in Congress, where opposition grew daily. Still, it's unclear that Mr. Bentsen's presence would have made a difference.Until a few weeks ago there was a sense in Washington that Mr. Rubin excelled at being Mr. Inside, and that the glare of scrutiny -- and the sparring with Congress that will intensify when the Administration's budget is submitted this week -- would make him regret seeking the Treasury job.Advertisement"He doesn't naturally seek the spotlight, and you get the sense that he dislikes a lot of the public role," said one senior official who has worked with him closely. "At the White House, it never failed: Whenever he was about to leave on a major trip with the President, he would always come by and say 'Do I really have to go?' " Sometimes he didn't, skipping the Asian economic summit in Indonesia in 1994..Mr. Rubin points out that he was not as reclusive as his Washington reputation suggests. "When I was running the N.E.C., I was on television probably once a week. Maybe it was just shows no one watches." But since the start of the Mexico crisis, he has also become a daily fixture on Capitol Hill, testifying, talking in private to the party caucuses, never showing anger when member after member of the House Banking Committee denounced the $40 billion bailout as a reward to Mr. Rubin's rich friends on Wall Street, who made bad bets on Mexico.MR. Rubin, who is believed to be worth about $100 million himself, was ready with his response. "I don't give one whit for the investors, and if that's what this was about, we wouldn't be here talking about it" he shot back at one point.But it was impossible to save Mexico, he said time and again, without also helping those who had sunk their money there. Mr. Rubin could also be enormously patient, as evidenced at one hearing when it became clear that a member of the House Banking Committee, attacking the plan to rescue Mexico, did not understand the difference between a loan guarantee -- essentially co-signing a loan -- and actually lending money to Mexico. Back in his office, he smiled and asked some visitors "Isn't democracy a wonderful thing?""This is the part of the job that's going to give him ulcers," one Treasury official said.But even after the Administration's effort had collapsed, Mr. Rubin was still winning praise. "The problems were not with Rubin, but in the White House and with the Democratic party up here, where there was no discipline on this," said Representative Jim Leach, the Iowa Republican who heads the House Banking Committee and spent two weeks drafting compromise legislation for the ill-fated $40 billion loan-guarantee program. "I think Bob Rubin brought to a very political town a fine sense of the outside world, with a manner that is competent and quiet, without being arrogant. And almost overnight, he has become the pre-eminent cabinet member."Whether Mr. Rubin continues to impress may depend on whether the Mexico decisions made this week come back to haunt the White House. If the Mexicans fail to reform their now discredited techniques for handling their economy, if the peso's devaluation hurts American imports and workers, or if illegal aliens surge into Texas and California, the president's team, having acted alone, will be blamed alone.But Mr. Rubin says inaction would be a withdrawal of American participation in emerging markets, backtracking from the world's move toward more open economies and toward reform. "Fixing this now is cheap," he said early in the crisis. "Fixing it later may be very expensive."We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 1995, on Page 3003001 of the National edition with the headline: The Education of Robert Rubin. 
The Big Board said 1.91 billion shares had been sold short and not covered, or bought back, as of Feb. 15, up from the 1.81 billion shares held short on Jan. 13. The previous record short interest was last Dec. 15, when 1.85 billion shares were held short.On the much smaller American Stock Exchange, short interest also increased last month, after declining from a record high in October. In the recent period, 95.9 million shares were held short, up from 95.2 million a month earlier.In a short sale, investors betting that a stock's price will fall borrow shares from a broker and sell them "short" in the market. Later they buy the shares back, profiting if they get the shares at a lower price but losing money if the stock has risen.In recent years, sophisticated investment firms have used short sales for reasons other than a simple bet that a given company's shares are overvalued. They may combine various positions including futures and options as well as stocks in an effort to capture various market discrepancies.AdvertisementThe largest increase in short interest was in RJR Nabisco Holdings, which rose to 53.5 million shares held short. During the period, shares in a spun-off Nabisco food unit began trading and the company announced a reverse stock split.Short interest in the Ford Motor Company increased 21 percent, to 45.1 million shares.Short interest is often measured in terms of a so-called cover ratio --the number of days it would take to trade all the shares sold short, given the average trading volume for the stock. The largest cover ratio last month was for the Lomas Financial Corporation, a real estate and mortgage concern.The 4.36 million Lomas shares held short represent 150 days of average trading.These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month of at least 500,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at least 152,573 shares.Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.A -- American Stock Exchange.N -- New York Stock Exchange.N.L. -- Not listed.+ -- Stock split.* (American Stock Exchange only.) May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders; other special situations.Short interest may also be affected by options positions.* Indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 1995, on Page D00006 of the National edition with the headline: A Big-Board Record for Uncovered Short Sales. 
IF there isn't a local law of urban proximity, there should be, and it would go like this: The closer an enclave is to Manhattan, the farther it seems to be from Manhattan. Leafy Whitestone, Queens, for example, or sleepy Edgewater, N.J. The prime case may be Greenpoint, Brooklyn, nestled into the northwest corner of the borough by the East River. Close as it is to Manhattan, Greenpoint is arguably even closer to Cracow, Poland.A side street in old Cracow is where the tiny, always busy Rzeszowska Bakery seems to belong, for example, although it's at the corner of Manhattan Avenue and Java Street in Greenpoint. On a recent mild Sunday morning, the bakery's door was flung open, allowing bees to find their way to the cheese babkas dotted with dried cherries atop the counter. One wall is graced by a Madonna, the opposite wall by a Polish eagle. A dainty white curtain embroidered with roses, so typical of Polish shops, drapes the door to the kitchen."Prosze, pana?" ("Yes please, sir?") asked the young woman behind the counter.Answered in English, she blushed. As at so many other shops in Greenpoint, Polish is the only language that counts at the Rzeszowska Bakery. Two blocks away, the newsstand next to the Greenpoint Avenue subway entrance carries a dozen newspapers and three crossword-puzzle magazines in Polish. Even some "No Parking" signs are posted in Polish down by the waterfront, only blocks from where the armored Union warship Monitor was built and launched in 1862. That was when the concentration of shipbuilding in Greenpoint was reputed to be as dense as anywhere on earth except on the River Clyde in Scotland.Greenpoint has long been a Polish stronghold. Visiting New York City in 1969, the Archbishop of Poland, now Pope John Paul II, quartered himself with the Vincentian fathers of St. Stanislaus Kostka Church (circa 1890) on Driggs Avenue. A new surge of immigration, much of it undocumented, is now under way and 35,000 Poles are estimated to be living in Greenpoint. The City Councilman who represents Greenpoint, Kenneth Fisher, pointed out that in Poland's first free elections, held in 1990, 7,000 absentee ballots came from Greenpoint.AdvertisementGreenpoint is the sort of city neighborhood that seems ever more endangered, ever more desirable: cohesive, clean, lively, low-rise and comparatively safe. (The local 94th Precinct recorded eight homicides last year, a minuscule figure by borough standards.) The community achieves all of this despite few architectural high spots, a waterfront that is dilapidated and unfriendly to would-be promenaders and the presence of the largest sewage plant in the Northeast as well as a gargantuan garbage transfer complex that is abhorred by residents. For good measure, Greenpoint also has the city's only licensed storage depot for radioactive materials, unsettlingly named Radiac.In earlier days, Greenpoint was a 10-minute ferry ride from Manhattan. Without ferries, it's more remote than some more distant sections of the city. Newtown Creek separates Greenpoint from Queens to the north, while the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway cuts it off from the rest of Brooklyn to the south and east. Subway connections can be onerous. Four different trains (No. 1, D, E, G), for example, are required to reach Greenpoint from Manhattan's Upper West Side. "The charm and livability of this community," said the Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden, "is one of our best-kept secrets," Another well-kept secret: Greenpoint was the hometown of Mae West. Kielbasa PlusThe Polish flavor of Greenpoint is best savored along the commercial axis formed by Manhattan and Nassau Avenues. For fans of kielbasa and other smoked meats, action central is a single block of Manhattan Avenue, just above Greenpoint Avenue. Several hickory-scented delicatessens are here, their myriad kielbasi, thin and fat, hot and mild, hanging overhead like stalactites. On weekends, these shops are as crowded as Zabar's.Staropolski, at No. 912, makes selecting a sausage easiest for the neophyte, with its excellent signs. The W. Nassau Meat Market, more commonly known as Kiszka, across the street at No. 915, has the nattiest staff, turned out in red and white uniforms. A large roasting pan of smoked cabbage is usually in Kiszka's window: it's earthy, spicy and inexpensive at $1.50 a well-stuffed portion.At Slodycze Inc., the candy store at 772 Manhattan Avenue, don't expect the Belgian or French emphasis on ultrarich fresh chocolates. Do expect an encyclopedic collection of wrapped and tinned confections. Polish specialties include gooseberries and prunes enrobed in dark chocolate ($4.95 a pound) and honeyed sesame crisps ($3.84 for 25 ounces). Wedel's own cocoa powder is a bargain at 79 cents for 100 grams (just over three ounces). This establishment can't be accused of straying from its roots: its billboards in Greenpoint subway stations are written entirely in Polish.Love of fresh chocolate need not go unrequited, however. There's an array of expertly turned out chocolate pastries at Chocolatiere, a bright white bakery at 615 Manhattan Avenue. Alone among local bakeries, this one has table service. Cappuccino is presented in a proper china cup and saucer. If you aren't ready for a cut of chocolate mazurka ($1.75), the oversize croissants, fruit tarts and linzer torts are happy alternatives. Stuff, Old and OddJunk-shop aficionados will be well met along Manhattan Avenue. The unnamed shop at No. 1004-1006 is, in particular, the real thing, dimly lighted and piled, stacked and stuffed with unsifted objects. Mike's Department Store (the old blacked-out sign says Joe's Department Store) at No. 1026 is, despite the name, another rich second-hand source. Bargaining in these shops is likely to become especially sporting if the customer doesn't speak Polish.Home-furnishings buffs have a new resource in the Wood Center, which opened in November in the rambling, red-brick industrial building at No. 1155 Manhattan Avenue, abutting Newtown Creek. The shop recycles surplus items from local workshops, specializing in architectural wood, metal and stone. Finely carved and turned chair and table legs can be had for under $10. Scallop-edged, richly textured marble coffee-table tops sell for about $70. Twenty-five-pound bags of maple high heels, vintage unknown, are a bargain at $5 a bag and will make high-class firewood. Or take your pick from large bins of wood scraps, for 25 and 50 cents each.AdvertisementOne patch of Greenpoint wood that won't soon be recycled can be found along the waterfront on West Street at the foot of Greenpoint Avenue, where cobblestones -- or so they appear to be -- in front of an old warehouse are actually quarter-sawed hardwood blocks. Look closely, and you'll see the grain. At least a century old, these "stones" are fully intact. Better at absorbing sound than stone is, they were once common.Almost as easy to miss as these wood cobblestones is a small bronze tablet at the foot of Calyer Street, attached to the wall of a truck-dispatching office. It's the only acknowledgment that here Thomas Rowland built an ironclad warship, the Monitor, in less than four months, launching it on Jan. 30, 1862. Five weeks later, the Monitor fought the Merrimac, which had been refitted by the Confederates, in the first battle between ironclad ships. Here, too, iron pipes, 7 1/2 feet in diameter, were wrought and cast in the 1860's for the landmark Highbridge Aquaduct of the Croton reservoir system. The Monitor lies underwater off Cape Hatteras, but the pipes remain in service. An Intimate ModestyWhile Manhattan Avenue, still the commercial spine of Greenpoint, maintains a slightly frowzy prewar ambiance, the residential side streets to the west take a firm step back into the last century. Even their names -- Java, Kent, Milton, Noble -- hark back to another era. These blocks are the heart of the 11-block Greenpoint Historic District, designated in 1982. Town houses here, most built after the Civil War, are no match for the more imposing examples fanning off from Grand Army Plaza or on Brooklyn Heights. If they were, they would be untrue to Greenpoint's particular modesty.The occasional grand house does stand out, notably a facing pair at 130 and 131 Kent Street. Milton Street, which vies with Kent as the district's finest residential presence, also offers a direct sightline to the lively, red brick and white limestone St. Anthony of Padua Church. Its 240-foot spire effortlessly soars over this gently scaled community, where the recent construction of a five-floor apartment house on Franklin Street drew howls of protest that it was excessively high.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The most intimate expression of old Greenpoint may be the bend of Oak and Guernsey Streets, a small-town corner where a sagging but handsomely porticoed home for the aged (built in 1887) is set back in an overgrown lot, two doors away from a four-story Victorian home that is still immaculately wood-sided, amid blocks of asbestos and aluminum-fronted houses. A horse and buggy could comfortably pull up here.Greenpoint's single ambitiously scaled apartment house is the Astral, with multiple rugged, arched entrances on Franklin Street, Java and India Streets. Designed by Lamb & Rich after the Peabody Apartments in London, the Astral was built in 1886 by Charles Pratt to provide modern housing for workers at his Astral kerosene refinery. (Shreve & Lamb went on to design the main building of the Pratt Institute, in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn.) The Astral still houses workers, now mainly Hispanic, employed at local factories.Greenpoint's only other genuinely imposing secular landmark is the Roman-style Greenpoint Savings Bank, at 807 Manhattan Avenue. Its stained-glass dome and 40-foot-high interior columns with gold-hued capitals can be viewed through the bank's big windows even at night.The West Street waterfront, lined with hulks of old factories and warehouses, is quiet on weekends except for the occasional movie made here (recently, "Dead Presidents"). On a recent mild Sunday, however, the concrete pier at the end of India Street teemed with fishermen catching baby bluefish, herring and sea robins. With its slight tilt to the northwest, this pier commands a breathtakingly complete view of midtown Manhattan.Artists have infiltrated Greenpoint for years, driven out of Manhattan by high rents. Yet galleries don't thrive. "There's no collecting base out here," explains Joe Amrhein, whose Pierogi 2000, at 167 North Ninth Street on Greenpoint's southern fringe, is one of two galleries currently operating. "I try to stay open on Sunday and Monday, when the Manhattan art world shuts down." His next exhibition, a group show called "Actual Painting," opens Jan. 20 for three weekends.AdvertisementLocal artists do occasionally band together for weekend shows. Currently, the sculptors Glen Nienstaat, Paul Zawisyha and Dion Kilmer display their work on weekends in an unrented ground floor space at 72 Berry Street. A showcase for Polish art is the Lipert Gallery at 147 Milton Street, open daily except Sundays. A Borscht BeltGreenpoint lacks high-end restaurants, but not satisfying Polish food. Dishes that are especially warming when the cold winds blow are the sour-bread soup called zurek or white borscht, and the slow-cooked hunter's stew called bigos. Good anytime are pierogi stuffed with meat, cheese or vegetables. Any of these mainstay dishes are reliably offered at the subdued Polska Restauracja, at 136 Greenpoint Avenue; Pyza, at 631 Manhattan Avenue, and Stylowa, at 694 Manhattan Avenue, where a popular dish is Hungarian pancakes: three potato cakes, smothered in beef, dabbed with sour cream and topped with a whole pickled pepper ($5).In southern Greenpoint (confusingly referred to as the "North Side"), artists favor the Kasia Restaurant, at 146 Bedford Avenue. It's closed on weekends, but the North Side restaurant, at 124 Bedford Avenue, steps in with excellent apple pancakes for weekend brunch. The S & B Restaurant, at 194 Beford Avenue, offers honest, clove-scented, deep-red hot borscht with meat dumplings ($3.50).The best value in Greenpoint is found at the cafeteria-style Pod Strzecha ("Under the Eaves"), at 119 Nassau Avenue. The mushroom soup here is stoked with a variety of fried funghi ($1.50). The kapushka, or sauerkraut, carrot and potato soup, is hearty yet delicately calibrated ($1). Meat and chicken cutlets are huge, and just as tasty are the smaller handmade pierogi ruskii (stuffed with cabbage and potatoes), topped with caramelized onions ($3.25). Diners can serve themselves from a free salad bar. A traditional thin currant beverage called "komput" is served in lieu of water. Even with its low prices, Pod Strzecha puts fresh flowers on every table.For dessert, you could head to the Jaslowiczanka Bakery, at 163 Nassau Street. Noteworthy are the sugar-dusted, prune-filled rolls called pontek (50 cents each), so ruthlessly fresh that they feel down-filled to the touch.On the next block, the Polish Book Center (140 Nassau Avenue) offers a full range of titles, from Anne Tyler and Belva Plain in Polish to a handsome edition of Walt Whitman's "Song of Myself" with English and Polish texts on facing pages. Glorious SoundA small bust of the Rev. Jerzy Popieluszko, the Solidarity priest killed by the secret police in Poland in 1984, is easily missed at the edge of vast McCarren Park. On the eve of its dedication in 1988, the head was defaced. A dark thin line at the statue's neck is the only sign that the head has been replaced. The original, with its broken nose and gouged eyes, now rests on a red cushion in the vestibule of St. Stanislaus Kostka Church, a few blocks away.Its dreary tan brick exterior gives no hint of this church's brilliant and ornate interior. As at all of Greenpoint's Roman Catholic churches, St. Stanislaus Kostka overflows with the faithful on Sunday mornings. It's not unusual to see worshipers genuflecting on the sidewalk as they follow the service over loudspeakers.The church's St. Cecilia choir, directed by John Bartosiewicz, is a renowned and refined instrument. For choral music lovers, it's well worth a trip on Sunday to hear the 11:30 A.M. Mass in Polish. During the rest of the week, life in Greenpoint may be humble, even humdrum. But when the silken sound of the St. Cecilia choir floats through this resplendent church, Polish Greenpoint is in its hour of glory.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 1995, on Page C00001 of the National edition with the headline: Old-World Poland With an East River View. 
Short-selling is the opposite of the usual stock market pattern. Rather than purchasing stocks and hoping to sell them later at a higher price, a trader who sells short borrows shares from a broker, sells them and then hopes to buy an equal number on the open market at a lower price.  The danger to short-selling is that the price of any stock could continue to rise indefinitely and a trader could lose money when buying it back."I don't think the statistics reflect a backing off of short-selling by people with true bearish sentiments," William D. Lyons, editor of the Short On Value newsletter in Atlanta, said.  "As we go into a year that seems to hold further interest rises, it appears that experienced short-sellers are staying with their short positions."A high short-interest level has typically been an indicator of bearish sentiment in the stock market. But investors sell short for many reasons today, with only a few of them reflecting genuine bearish convictions. Some analysts even consider rising short positions as a bullish sign, because short-sellers must eventually repurchase their borrowed shares.Since Jan. 1, the Dow Jones industrial average has risen 2.4 percent, the Standard & Poor's 500 index has gained 2.2 percent and the Nasdaq composite index has increased 2.7 percent.AdvertisementThe largest monthly advance in outstanding short interest on the New York exchange was registered by U S West Inc., followed by RJR Nabisco Holdings, the Ivax Corporation, Citicorp and the Carnival Corporation. The companies with the biggest short positions were the Ford Motor Company, RJR Nabisco, the Walt Disney Company, the Chrysler Corporation and Citicorp.These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month of at least 500,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at least 126,225 shares.Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.A -- American Stock Exchange.N -- New York Stock Exchange.N.L. -- Not listed.+ -- Stock split.* (American Stock Exchange only.) May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders; other special situations.Short interest may also be affected by options positions.# indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 1995, on Page D00005 of the National edition with the headline: Uncovered Short Sales Decline at Two Exchanges. 
STATIONED in the sky, the eye of a camera sweeping across New York would have looked down at a cranky but energized city in 1994. Its residents hungering for order, the civic life of New York's neighborhoods evolved as both prickly and aggressive, amounting to a stiffening of civic resolve that sought control over the streets and an erasure of the decades-old impulse of shrugging off disorder. Hearts hardened; community meetings often turned ugly.Feeding off new commercial life swelling in neighborhoods from SoHo to the Upper West Side, Manhattan had a crisper feel, perhaps caffeinated by the new-style coffee bars that cropped up on some streets three at a time. Huge stores took over the empty hulks that were the dreams of turn-of the-century retailers. Themes and hooks were demanded, and the rollicking permutations of capitalism sometimes took bizarre forms. Televisions turned up above urinals in restaurants. One nightclub owner decided to have an earthquake night: the place shook at midnight as Los Angeles video imagery abounded. When the venture failed, he tried a Latin American earthquake and the imagery turned Cuban.The city headed into 1995 with pockets of energy and new confidence but with the local economy still weak in key areas and residents about to feel the affects of the contraction of the municipal budget. In a special report, the reporters and editors of The City present a survey of 1994 -- not from aloft but from down on the ground in the neighborhoods -- with an eye toward what the key local issues are likely to be in 1995. LOWER MANHATTAN  Emergency Care on Wall Street  Here was a neighborhood with an identity crisis. Once the beating heart of the greed decade, the financial district continued the hemorrhage that has cost 100,000 jobs below Chambers Street in the last seven years and left vacancy rates of up to 25 percent in some of the same buildings that once represented New York's power and virility on the world scene. With real-estate interests stung and a vacuum of leadership, a Business Improvement District was formed to avoid obsolescence by diversifying the area away from financial services and into more of a 24-hour neighborhood. At year's end, the Giuliani administration offered what could be the city's largest development proposal in more than 10 years, a package that included tax breaks, zoning changes and an express taxi lane. Around town some grumbled that the plan was a bailout that could just as well have been offered to other areas. The proposal now goes to the City Council. CHINATOWN  Changing Tongs  "I'm late for the doctor," a frail Benny Ong told a reporter in June as two bodyguards helped him to a waiting car on Pell Street, the narrow alley where he was said to run his extortion rackets and gambling dens, and where he gained his nickname "hatchet man" for his skill with an ax. Two months later, as Mr. Ong made his final trip through Chinatown in a funeral procession with 120 black limousines, the streets were silent in reverence. The death of the 87-year-old "Godfather of Chinatown," the adviser-in-chief of the Hip Sing Association, represented the end of the era of old-time Chinese organized-crime leaders. These days, Chinese crime has focused on new quarries -- the smuggling of Fujianese immigrants and the peddling of heroin -- and has become less centralized, with loosely formed gangs practicing extortion around the city. The tongs, now wishing to be called associations, even began a campaign to cleanse their image as tools of gangsters. All in all, continued prosecutions may have shaken up some organized-crime pockets. Parade Politics  It seems obligatory these days that an ethnic parade be tangled in controversy. This year it was Chinatown's turn. The first official pro-mainland parade ran through the neighborhood in September, its very presence a looming challenge to Chinatown's established pro-Nationalist leadership. But the leaders of the mainland parade cried favoritism when the police gave them a route outside the traditional center of Chinatown. They were also angry that Capt. Thomas M. Chan of the Fifth Precinct did not march in their parade but had a prominent spot a few weeks later in the annual Nationalist parade, which was granted its usual central Chinatown route. Look for the parades to be an issue again this year. SOHO/TRIBECA  Smoothing the Edges  The sidewalks were jammed. Tourists poured in. Shoppers browsed. Broadway had a furious pace below Houston Street. To some lament, the cyclical waves of the city economy turned SoHo, once a manufacturing district and then a frontier home for artist/pioneers, into a location for Armani A/X and Lechters Housewares and an international marketplace for style and design. As if to punctuate the trend, Hartz Mountain announced in December that it would build a large hotel on Grand Street.For its part, TriBeCa continued to grow as a restaurant district. Robert De Niro, who has blended his hip star image with the low rents below Canal to create what amounts to a new film district, was a partner in a very hot new restaurant, Nobu, and planned a bakery. Down the block, Bubby's became a lunchtime scene; one film executive called it "the East Coast Polo Lounge." LOWER EAST SIDE/EAST VILLAGE  ABC's of Gentrification  Renewing interest that flickered briefly in the go-go 1980's, investors are now plowing money into this once-grungy street, giving it a more trendy look, with boutiques and designer food. But even with a tamer Tompkins Square Park, the old Haight Ashbury feel isn't completely gone. And entrepreneurial inspiration can still be offbeat, as evidenced by the opening of the club Babyland, with its infantilism motif: naked Barbie dolls, a Playskool bar and mooing doors.AdvertisementMaster of the Brawl Already known for the city's wildest and toughest brand of politics, these neighborhoods now have one of the city's most controversial politicians: Councilman Antonio Pagan. Gay, Hispanic and relatively conservative, the 35-year-old lawyer opposes low-income housing and many new social services. He has aroused such venom with his acid tongue that one local paper regularly portrays him as a cockroach; political opponents have hit him with defamation suits. Others say he is dedicated and gets things done, using his aggressive manner in many neighborhood causes. He lost one important battle when his close ally, William E. Ubinas, was deposed as superintendent of School District 1 after a tumultuous fight.Target: The Squatters Housing policy often amounts to triage, and perhaps nowhere is this more evident than on East 13th Street, where squatters are encamped in five city-owned tenements. Over the years officials have largely let these and other squatters around the city alone, but with thousands of people on waiting lists for low-rent apartments, housing officials want the buildings back. The 13th Street battle, now in the courts, has been furiously fought. At one community board meeting the squatters and their supporters caused such pandemonium that board members had to retreat behind a barrier of a dozen shield-bearing police officers to vote yes on the city's plans. NOHO  Reassessing Astor Place  Just as development smoothed out Avenue A, it began to alter the faintly industrial feel of Astor Place. Conran's closed, Cooper Square Books departed and the Greek-style diner, the Astor Riviera Cafe, shut its doors. What is coming in tells much about Asian investment in the city and the spate of large discount stores and coffee bars. The newcomers: a Barnes & Noble, taking over Conran's; Starbucks, the Seattle-based coffee chain, subsuming the Riviera, and loft-style apartments in the old District 65 union building, courtesy of a group from China. WEST VILLAGE  It's All in the Details  "You take care of the little things, and the big things take care of themselves," said Capt. Peter Cassidy, executive officer of the Sixth Precinct. And so this area, which is deluged with young people each weekend, particularly on Eighth Street, became an experiment in quality-of-life enforcement. This meant increased patrolling, stepped-up enforcement using computers to track violators, and more summonses for minor offenses, like noisy portable radios, graffiti vandalism and unlicensed vending. Some progress was reported in the area, and the police decided to expand the program elsewhere in the city.The Tolerance Envelope Neighbors in one of New York's most historically tolerant communities decided they had reached their limit of tolerance when a physician, Dr. Joyce Wallace, sought to open a home for reforming prostitutes in her West 13th Street brownstone. The proposal was killed. CHELSEA  Doubly Pleased in Chelsea  In the give and take of New York's neighborhoods, Chelsea found itself on the receiving end of economic and geographic changes in two sometimes overlapping communities -- the city's gay world and its art world. Symbolizing a northward shift of gay life, a Different Light, a bookstore that is a cultural hub in gay literary circles, moved from the West Village to 19th Street. In some people's minds, Eighth Avenue has now supplanted Christopher Street as the city's main gay thoroughfare, a notion largely confirmed by the crowds that poured into Chelsea during the Gay Games.Farther west, amid the warehouses and factory buildings clustered about 10th Avenue, West Chelsea began to emerge as a serious player in the city's art scene. Several new galleries and dozens of studios opened, and more are coming. The area is attracting artists fleeing SoHo's high rents and galleries from 57th Street and Madison Avenue. The locals farther east, often intimidated by the goings-on across 10th Avenue, are pleased.Life on the Pier The reconstruction of the Chelsea Piers, between 17th and 22d Streets, took shape. Soon to come: a sports club, two indoor ice-skating rinks, a park and a mammoth Herman's sporting-goods store. FLATIRON/UNION SQUARE  A New Space Age   Large available spaces, rents substantially lower than midtown's and the decision of large suburban superstores to overcome their fears of Manhattan: Around the Flatiron, these were the ingredients of a throbbing blend of urban funk, suburban shopping and what is probably the city's hottest restaurant district. Bradlees opened in Union Square, and Toys "R" Us arrived, too. And in what could provide fuel for preservationists forever, a new generation of superstores needing big, uncut spaces reclaimed the grand old landmarked retail mammoths along the old Ladies Mile, Avenue of the Americas below 23d Street. On the restaurant front, places like Gramercy Tavern, Patria and C. T. were defining a new New York style of dining. STUYVESANT TOWN/GRAMERCY PARK Socially Saturated?   In few areas was the nastiness of "quality-of-life" battles so apparent. People on Irving Place and environs, already feeling aggrieved by scores of social-service programs in the area, fought the move by a nonprofit group, Community Access, to create housing for the mentally ill on East 18th Street. When the bank that owned the building backed out, three residents who opposed the project were ordered to turn over their personal diaries, petitions and phone messages as part of a Federal investigation into whether antidiscrimination housing laws had been broken. Civil libertarians and others accused the government of conducting a witchhunt that would have a chilling effect on community protest. The housing proposal died in the courts last week. . . . Up on East 23d, residents had been exasperated for years by the legal system's sluggishness in responding to the situation at the Kenmore Hotel, where roving bands of drug dealers took over entire floors, elderly people were robbed and sometimes killed and prostitutes plied their trade. Last June, the neighborhood's pleas were answered when Federal authorities seized the hotel and turned it over to private management. MIDTOWN  The Disney Regeneration  Since the early days of the century, the Theater District has been as much a territory of the mind as a physical location, a kind of pleasure center in the national brain, an engine of mass culture, theaters, television, publishing and music. That was before the area turned into a playground for prostitutes, pornography and runaway teen-agers, a concentration that left the city with an international reputation for municipal incontinence. Last year, the shape of the future came more into focus. The 42d Street redevelopment moved along as storefronts continued to empty out and condemnation guns were put to the heads of porn shop owners, opening the way, if the economy holds, for a new generation of theaters, offices and a hotel. The neighborhood's larger role as an office district -- serving law firms and financial services -- was underscored by the imminent arrival of Morgan Stanley and its 10,000 jobs. The new Times Square appears cleaner on the ground (up high, the towering Gulliver in the Calvin Klein ad would have astonished Ratso Rizzo), better lighted and better patrolled. And in a seminal move that could affect the tone of 42d Street for decades, Disney staked its flag on the New Amsterdam Theater, and MTV indicated that it would build a studio complex and a restaurant. Other entertainment folks are expected to follow. What lies ahead for the nation's psyche remains to be seen. But if Walter Winchell mind-melding with Texas Guinan at El Fey seven decades ago transmogrified into a national culture of celebrity, one wonders what new form will emerge from the mingling of an MTV producer with a Disney director and a Morgan Stanley analyst belly up at the bar at the flamboyant new hotel across from the Port Authority. Celestial Real Estate   Few topics engendered as virulent a debate as 57th Street, a boulevard with a rep once draped in Tiffany but now a noun phrase for $9 hamburgers and Tom and Jerry. With a Warner Brother's studio store, the Harley-Davidson Cafe, the Hard Rock Cafe, the Sony Arcade nearby on Madison Avenue and the coming of the restaurant Jekyll & Hyde, the street has alerted, among some, a deep atavistic New York fear of cultural colonization by Hollywood. Better pretension than superficiality, they say. Thumbing their noses at the critics, those desiring earsplitting music and coveting the Porky the Pig doll came anyway, helping Fifth Avenue to edge Tokyo's Ginza as the most expensive place in the world to rent retail space. As a further thumb-in-the-eye, the Hollywood Zeuses Steven Spielberg and Jeffrey Katzenberg were trying at year's end to maneuver into 20,000 feet at 120 West 57th Street, a place to park another Dive!, their Los Angeles restaurant. UPPER EAST SIDE  A Private Affair? So deep did the fear of crime cut, despite falling crime statistics, that an extraordinary idea emerged on the Upper East Side: blanket the area from 59th to 86th Streets with a security force of 500 guards and pay for it with property taxes raised through a special assessment district. Around the city, private security has taken on a much greater role in recent years, but this was by far the most extensive rendition yet. Propelled by the prominent realtor Douglas Elliman and such local institutions as the Dalton School, which had become unnerved by the increasing number of muggings of students, the proposal drew heated debate and exposed neighborhood divisions. Underscoring the particular brand of populism that holds real estate interests in suspicion in the generally well-off neighborhood, many block associations opposed the move, in part because of the image of elitism it would feed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Opinion even had a territorial dimension, with the tonier west side of Lexington Avenue more amenable to the plan than the east. Opposition rested on several grounds: the elitist argument; the cost, and the worry that increasing private security would encourage the police to shift their resources to other neighborhoods. By the end of the year the plan seemed in grave jeopardy.The Rail Link The East Side found itself smack in the middle of a major regional question: plans for an airport rail link with a terminus below the old Alexander's building at 59th and Lexington Avenue. With Federal funds at least partially committed, the project would address the agony and expense of the sometimes circuitous cab rides from J.F.K. and La Guardia Airports that amount to an informal tax on tourist and business travel in the city. But many voices rose in opposition, angered by the prospect of adding to the already excruciating traffic in the area. With protests expressed along the route in Queens, the project raised the issue posed by those who fondly remember the authoritarian approach of Robert Moses: can a major project be built in New York anymore?Footnotes  East Side Republicans were ascendant, holding four of the six legislative positions, and with a favorite son ensconced in City Hall, phone calls were returned once again. Councilman Charles Millard, though, fell short in trying to unseat Representative Carolyn B. Maloney. . . . Zoning changes made it less profitable to build towers higher than about 35 stories. . . . Bar competition intensified, with themes abounding. "It's totally the place to party," one patron said of the Ski Bar. UPPER WEST SIDE  Super Square Is midtown moving northward? Already buzzing with traffic and pedestrians, feeding off the energy of the Lincoln Center fountains and the music buffs at Tower Records, Lincoln Square could never be described as sleepy. But the crossing of Broadway and Columbus Avenues began to emerge as one of Manhattan's most important centers of gravity with the first signs of three projects by Millenium Partners, by far the largest new development in the city. In total, 540,000 square feet of retail space is being built, including a vast Reebok gymnasium and another Barnes & Noble superstore, along with 600 rental or condominium apartments. Manhattan's largest movie theater has already arrived -- Sony Lincoln Square, with nine screens plus an eight-story-high Imax screen that shows films in three dimensions.Perhaps lulled by the desultory real estate climate of the early 1990's and a body politic thirsting for investment and tax revenues, the neighborhood awoke late to the impact of the project. The bottom line: This new wave of development -- which also comprises Donald J. Trump's huge Riverside South development from 59th to 72d Street, the 1,000-apartment Manhattan West complex and Mr. Trump's remodeling of the former Gulf & Western Building at Columbus Circle -- could bring 13,000 new residential units to the area in just a few years. 'No Mas,' Liberally There was no better gauge for the growing resistance to social-service programs than on the Upper West Side, with its long history of tolerance and liberal voting patterns. This year many in the neighborhood where Larry Hogue made his rounds decided they had had enough; some said even a midday walk with their children in baby carriages had a threatening air. At meetings, nonprofit leaders were shouted down with the same anger reserved for pro-war speakers 20 years before.AdvertisementBy one count, 80 social-service programs sat between West 90th and 110th Streets. Protests forced the Volunteers of America, a nonprofit group, to halve the number of chronically mentally ill homeless in a new site at Broadway and 101st Street. Fifteen blocks to the south, a plan to move homeless people into Euclid Hall also sparked protests.In true contentious Upper West Side fashion, the Euclid opposition was split into three groups. "You must remember," said Joseph Levie, a lawyer associated with two of the groups, "that you are dealing with West Siders who can find an issue of principle about how they put on their eyeglasses." Footnotes Upper West Siders can be terriers. Seeking smooth shooting along Central Park West for a parade scene, the producers of "Miracle on 34th Street" made a number of peace offerings -- including a donation to the West 76th Street Block Association. "It's a very vocal neighborhood with very articulate people who know where power lies in this city," said Amy Sultan of the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting. . . . Major reconstruction work on Columbus Avenue caused major headaches. City officials said they might be able to finish the project a year early, by November. HARLEM  The Scandal It may have failed to capture the public psyche as the rebel-underdog Serpico did in the early 70's, but for sheer numbers and pervasiveness, there has been nothing else in the Police Department's 146-year history to match the scandal in the 30th Precinct: nearly one of every six officers arrested in what seems the particular brand of late-20th century police corruption spawned by the spread of heroin and cocaine: bands of officers stealing drugs and money from dealers. Perhaps because the victims themselves were drug dealers and some of the officers were actually considered effective elsewhere on their rounds, there was just enough moral ambiguity to squash a good-vs.-evil story line.But the message was not lost on the department's hierarchy, which had to deal with the notion that such widespread lawlessness went unnoticed, or at least unreported, by the precinct's leadership. In fact two of the arrestees were sergeants, one of whom, Kevin P. Nunnery, was charged with leading an eight-team unit on a two-year binge of illegal apartment and car break-ins. The unit even had a name: Nunnery's Raiders. The department cleaned house and tried to mend fences with Harlem residents, but the reaction of residents at a goodwill meeting showed how far the precinct had to go: A longtime resident said afterward, "I don't think corruption is gone from the precinct, but I didn't want to say anything." She said she feared retribution. The Vendors In a local political culture built on a foundation of immigration, the idea of sweeping the streets of street vendors has always lent itself to soul-searching. But so congested have some streets become in recent years that when the city began toughening its stance, the body politic basically stood back and watched, with the few vocal objections coming from the vendors themselves. The Armageddon of this policy came on Oct. 17, when the police swept across Harlem's main boulevard, 125th Street, arresting 22 vendors. The sweep had wide support among Harlem's business and political leadership. The vendors were relocated to a lot at 116th Street and Lenox Avenue. Business, they say, is terrible. Footnotes After much deliberation, lobbying and interborough warfare with the Bronx, Harlem became part of a Federal empowerment zone that also includes Washington Heights, Inwood and the South Bronx. Now the hard part: what is likely to be brutal trench warfare over division of the $300 million in spoils. . . . Ralph Ellison, author of "Invisible Man," died at 80, largely unknown to the people in his neighborhood on upper Riverside Drive. "And it's a shame, too," said his postman, John B. Weaver. "He should have been king here." WASHINGTON HEIGHTS/INWOOD Wanted: Breathing Space Around the city, rising enrollment and the budget crunch have put pressure on a number of school districts, leaving classrooms jammed and children learning in odd places. School District 6 in Upper Manhattan is one of the most crowded, complicating the logistics of education in a district with a school population that is 50 percent bilingual, the largest percentage in the state. The district's school population has risen from 21,000 to 26,000 in seven years and is expected to keep growing by 1,200 to 1,500 students a year. It is so crowded that this year 1,300 of its students were bused outside the district, some students eat in 20-minute shifts and some sit 37 in a classroom. Three new schools were ready to open last fall, to at least briefly relieve the overcrowding, but the money wasn't available. Footnotes A last legacy of the Washington Heights disturbances of 1992: the 34th Precinct was split in two, creating the newcq 33d Precinct, to appease community concerns and to better fight crime. . . . There will be new life at the Audubon Ballroom, the site of the assassination of Malcolm X. Columbia University is building a long-disputed biomedical-research complex around a section of the ballroom, on Broadway between 165th and 166th Streets, that will be preserved with murals to memorialize the Black Muslim leader. Also to come in the complex: a new incarnation of the West End Gate, the Columbia hangout down on 113th Street. . . . Younger residents and artists are moving to Inwood. Some have begun to seek leadership roles. The reaction of the locals has generally been favorable, though some think some of the plans -- i.e., the idea for a New Orleans-style trolley -- are a bit grandiose.We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 1995, on Page 13013005 of the National edition with the headline: NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT; Caffeine and Crackdowns: Dispatches From '94. 
